Lectures in Defence of the Christian Faith Christianity. Miracles form a part
of the riches of the faith; that appears to me to be their true character. It
is their claim to that distinction which it will be the object of the following
lecture to vindicate for these exceptional facts.  We shall first seek in
history for evidences to the reality of the miracles of Jesus Christ. We shall
then investigate nature, in order to discover in it the conditions of the
possibility of such facts. Lastly, we shall ask of Holy Scripture to reveal to
us their purpose in the divine plan.  The more exceptional a fact is, the
stronger will be the evidences required to prove its reality. Have we, then,
sufficient historical proofs of the reality of the miracles which the Christian
Church attributes to its Founder?  What is most notable here is that Josephus
speaks also, and in still greater detail, of John the Baptist, of his ministry,
his baptism, his influence, his death: he attributes a great defeat of Herod to
the murder of that prophet, and all this without speaking of a single miracle
as worked by John the Baptist. In this respect Josephus is in complete accord
with our evangelists, as he is also with regard to the miracles of Jesus
Christ. If we supposed that there existed, as has been asserted, in the spirit
of those times, a disposition to attribute miracles to great religious
geniuses, would not this tendency have shown itself above all with regard to
John the Baptist, whose person and work produced, by its strange and novel
character, an impression upon the popular imagina- tion perhaps more
considerable than did even those of Jesus Himself ? But no documents ever spoke
of a single miracle as worked by the forerunner. The writer who, in these last
years, has treated with the greatest thoroughness the question of the origin of
our first three Gospels, Professor Holtz- mann of Heidelberg,—who is not
suspected of partiality, since he is at the head of the free- thinkers in the
Grand Duchy of Baden,—concludes his study by declaring the results of modern
labours on this subject to be in perfect agreement with the traditions of the
most ancient ecclesiastical writers, namely, in affirming the writings which
form the basis of our first three Gospels—and these Gospels themselves—to have
been drawn up between the years 60 and 80 of our era—that is to say, no more
than from thirty to fifty years after the Lord's death.
