We draw a fourth argument from the close connection which exists between the
teaching of Jesus as a whole, and His miraculous working.  Attempts have of
late been made to disconnect Jesus the preacher of morality from Jesus the
worker of miracles. Men have offered to accept Him in the former, but only on
condition of giving Him up in the latter character. It is upon this basis that
the work of M. Eenan rests.  Let us take a few instances. The Pharisees once
took occasion, by the healing of a demoniac, to charge Jesus with casting out
devils by the help of the prince of the devils. To this outrageous accusa- tion
He replies: " A kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; if
Satan cast out Satan, how shall his kingdom stand?" In connection with this
perfectly reasonable saying we have a discourse of some length, one of the most
striking delivered by Jesus, and of which no one, not even Strauss, has
questioned the authenticity. But what is the mean- ing of this discourse, if
the charge said to have been made by the Pharisees against Jesus never was made
? and what would have been the meaning of that charge, if the miraculous cures
which are said to have given occasion to it never took place ? It is evident
that the miraculous act which serves as text to the discourse is inseparable
from it. Plainly, one must accept or reject the two together.  A third example.
The Sermon on the Mount is acknowledged as the chef d'ceuvre of the moral
teach- ing of Jesus; to such a degree, that the adversaries of the gospel would
wish to limit the whole of His teaching to this discourse. But what do we there
read ? In its concluding words Jesus says, " Many will say to Me in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name cast out
devils, and done many wonderful works ? But I will answer them, T know you
not." Had it not been an acknowledged fact that Jesus Himself worked
miracles,—that He worked them daily,—would it have been possible for Him,
without covering Himself with ridicule, to have spoken to this multitude of the
miracles which His disciples should work in His name?  Lectures in Defence of
the Christian Faith one from the other, we have a simple means ready to our
hands for getting rid of the former—it is to reject both. But in that case what
means will you have left yourself whereby to account for the greatest moral
revolution hitherto witnessed by mankind?
