We draw a concluding argument from the nature of the miraculous stories
contained in our Gospels. In respect of form, how great is their
simplicity—their candour! An honest man bears upon his countenance and manner
of speaking the stamp of his sincerity. Do our evangelists need a certificate
of honesty or of good faith ? Suppose in some evil hour you have seen, heaped
up before you, mountains of objections—of difficulties— . . .  open one of our
Gospels, read over one or two lines in the book itself; these mountains will
seem to you mere clouds which go off in vapour; you feel yourself in contact
with the divine reality.  When man invents a marvel, the excessive emphasis of
the tone of his writing betrays the unreality of his facts; it is the
prerogative of truth alone to be at once so grand and so simple.  And as to
their substance itself, what a difference is there between the gospel miracles
and those which fill the Jewish legends and the pagan mythologies!  The
contrast is so striking that it forced from M.  Eenan, in one of his first
works, this confession: " The marvellous in the Gospels is but sober good sense
compared with that which we meet with in the Jewish Apocryphal writings, or in
the Hindoo- European mythologies." 1 We must add, " and even in Christian books
composed at a later date than our Gospels." Lectures in Defence of the
Christian Faith There are in existence some accounts of the life of Jesus
called the Apocryphal Gospels, which were composed in the second century of our
era, inspired by that love of the marvellous which is inherent in our nature:
what is the character of the miraculous which we find in them ? We are told of
the child Jesus manufacturing, in company with other Nazareth children, birds
made of ordinary clay, and by breathing upon them He conferred upon those which
He made the power of flight; or, again, of the child Jesus when He had
accident- ally spilt upon the stairs the contents of a jug which He had just
filled at the well, gathering it up in a handkerchief, and presenting it to the
astonished Mary. Such are some invented miracles.  One easily recognises their
origin. And by what characteristics ? By this—the element of miraculous power
has been given to them; but that of holy charity, which is the stamp of works
truly divine, has been left out. But it is just this peculiar stamp which marks
all the miracles of Jesus reported by our Gospels.  Or if, in the second
century, and in the Church itself, men were so unskilful at inventing
fictitious history, even with the Gospels before them as models, what would the
Gospel itself have been if it had been composed a century earlier, and had been
inspired by the instincts of the natural man, without being fashioned after a
divine and living model?
