But can we give any rational account of facts of this nature ? Are they not in
plain contradiction, as we are so constantly told, with the fixity of the laws
which govern Nature ? And if in former times events of this kind did really
occur, why do they never happen in our day ? And if such things did come to
pass under our eyes, should we not have to believe the Creator to be a clumsy
workman, who, after having finished His work, finds Himself obliged to meddle
with it again, to correct its faults ? Such are the questions which may arise
in our minds as we contemplate the miracles of Jesus Christ. We are about to
make an attempt to answer them, while at the same time reminding our readers
that, in all that relates to matter and to Nature, we are met by obscurity and
mystery to a much greater degree than in that which belongs exclusively to the
world of spirit.  Lectures in Defence of the Christian Faith broken with that
fundamental article of our faith, the first word of Holy Scripture: " In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth." It is true that, after having
accomplished this creative act, God seems to have abdicated His sovereignty
over Nature. This great whole, like a well-made clock, proceeds peaceably in
the course that has been pre- scribed to it. But, even if we supposed that the
orderly state of things which we see before us had always existed, and that
Geology did not prove to us the mighty transformations by means of which it has
come to be what it is, none the less should we detect in Nature, even in her
present state of repose, a constant tendency to emancipate herself from the law
of physical necessity, and to lift herself by degrees into the sphere of
liberty. The lower domains of Nature are absolutely subject to the sovereignty
of the law of gravity, the universality of whose power is visible even to our
eyes in the spherical form of bodies. The singular phenomena of crystallization
exhibit even in metals a tendency to set themselves free from this law. By the
variety and multiplicity of the operations which constitute vegetable life,
plants raise themselves into a mode of existence very much freer and more
incalculable still.  In animals with their free movements, regulated only by
their will, we see the first glimmerings of the reign of liberty.
