The vinedresser's second son, Jean Birotteau, was drawn by the army, and during
the early wars of the Revolution promptly became a captain. At the battle of
the Trebbia, Macdonald called for volunteers to storm a battery, and Captain
Jean Birotteau charged with his company and fell. It appeared to be the destiny
of the Birotteaus that other men should supplant them, or that events should be
too strong for them wherever they ^ might be.  The youngest son is the chief
actor in this Scene.  When Cesar was fourteen years old, and could read, write,
and cipher, he left the district, and with one louis in his pocket set out on
foot for Paris to make his fortune. On the recommendation of an apothecary in
Tours, M. and Mme. Ragon, retail perfumers, took him as errand boy. Cesar at
that time was possessed of a pair of hobnailed shoes, a pair of breeches, blue
stockings, a sprigged waistcoat, a countryman's jacket, three ample shirts of
good linen, and a stout walking-stick. His hair might be clipped like a
chorister's, but he was a solidly- built Tourangeau; and any tendency to the
laziness rampant in his district was counteracted in him by a strong desire to
make his way in the world.  Cesar was paid six francs a month by way of wages.
He boarded in the house, and slept on a truckle-bed in the attics next to the
servant's room. The shopmen showed him how to fetch and carry and tie up
parcels, to sweep out the shop and the pavement before it, and made a butt of
him, breaking him in to business after the manner of their kind, and contriving
to blend a good deal of amusement (for themselves) with his instruction.  M.
and Mme. Ragon spoke to him as if he were a dog.  Nobody cared how tired the
apprentice might be, and he was often very tired and footsore of a night after
tramp- ing over the pavements, and his shoulders often ached.  The principle
'each for himself,' that gospel of great cities, put in application, made
Cesar's life in Paris a very hard one. He used to cry sometimes when the day
was over, and he thought of Touraine, where the peasant works leisurely, and
the mason takes his time about laying a stone, and toil is judiciously tempered
by idle- ness ; but he usually fell asleep before he reached the point of
thinking of running away, for his morning's round of work awaited him, and he
did his duty with the instinctive obedience of a yard dog. If he happened to
complain, the first shopman would smile jocosely. ' Ah, my boy,' said he, 'life
is not all roses at the ^ueen of Roses, and larks don't drop ready roasted into
your mouth ; first catch your lark, and then you want the other things before
you cook it.'
