Like all human beings who have no one to care for them, he fell in love with
the first woman who gave him a kind glance. The cook took Cesar under her wing,
and secret love passages followed, at which the assistants jeered unmercifully.
Luckily, two years later, the cook threw over Cesar for a young runaway from
the army, a fellow-countryman of hers who was hiding in Paris; and the Picard,
a land- owner to the extent of several acres, allowed himself to be drawn into
a marriage with Ursule.  But during those two years the cook fed her lad Cesar
well, and explained to him the seamy side of not a few of the mysteries of
Paris. Motives of jealousy led her to instil into him a perfect horror of low
haunts, whose perils seemingly were not unknown to her. In 1792 Cesar, the
basely deserted, had grown accustomed to his life; his feet were used to the
pavements, his shoulders accommodated to packing-cases, his wits to what he
called the humbug of Paris. So, when Ursule threw him over, he promptly took
comfort, for she had not realised any of his intuitive ideas as to sentiments.
Lascivious, bad-tempered, fawning, and rapacious, a selfish woman, given to
drink, she had jarred on Birotteau's unsophisticated nature, and had opened out
no fair future to him. At times the poor boy saw with dismay that he was bound
by the strongest of ties for a simple heart to a creature with whom he had no
sympathy. By the time that he was set free he had developed, and had reached
the age of sixteen. His wits had been sharpened by Ursule and by the shopmen's
jokes; he set himself to learn the business. Intelligence was hidden beneath
his simplicity.  When the Requisition of the terrible year n. made a clean
sweep of Citizen Ragon's house, Cesar Birotteau, promoted to be second
assistant, improved his position, received a salary of fifty livres per month,
and seated himself at the Ragons' table with joy unspeakable.  The second
assistant at the sign of the Queen of Roses had by this time saved six hundred
francs, and he now had a room filled with furniture such as he had for a long
time coveted, in which he could keep the belongings which he had accumulated
under lock and key. On Decadis, dressed *after the fashion of an epoch which
affected rough and homely ways, the quiet, humble peasant lad looked at least
the equal of other young citizens, and in this way he overleapt the social
barriers which in domestic life would, in different times, have been raised
between the peasant and the trading classes. Towards the end of that year his
honesty won for him the control of the till.  The awe-inspiring Citoyenne Ragon
saw to his linen, and husband and wife treated him like one of the family.
