Constance Pillerault daily received brilliant proposals, in which there was
never any mention of marriage ; and though her heart was as pure as her white
forehead, it was not until the indefatigable Cesar had proved his love by six
months of strategical operations, that she deigned to receive his attentions.
Even then she would not commit herself. Prudence had been demanded of her by
the multitudinous number of her admirers—wholesale wine merchants, well-to-do
bar-keepers, and others, who made eyes at her. The lover found a supporter in
her guardian, M. Claude-Joseph Pillerault, an iron- monger on the Quai de la
Ferraille, a discovery made by the secret espionage which is pre-eminently a
lover's shift.  In this rapid sketch, it is impossible to describe the delights
of this harmless Parisian love-intrigue ; the little extravagances
characteristic of the shopman—the first melons of the season,the little dinners
at Venua's, followed by the theatre, the drives into the country in a cab on
Sunday—must be passed over in silence. Cesar was not a positively handsome
young fellow, but there was nothing in his appearance to repel love. Life in
Paris and days spent in a dark shop had toned down the high colour natural to
the peasant lad. His thick black hair, his Norman breadth of shoulder, his
sturdy limbs, his simple straightforward look, all contributed to prepossess
people in his favour. Uncle Pillerault, the responsible guardian of his
brother's child, made various inquiries about the Tourangeau, and gave his
consent; and in the fair month of May 1800, Mlle. Pillerault promised to marry
Cesar Birotteau. He nearly fainted with joy when Constance-Barbe-Josephine
accepted him as her husband under a lime-tree at Sceaux.  Constance's
intelligence was a narrow one; she was the typical small tradesman's wife, who
always grumbles a little over her work, who refuses a thing at the outset, and
is vexgd wnln she is taken at her word ; whose restless activity takes all
things, from cash-box to kitchen, as its province, and supervises everything,
from the weightiest business transactions down to almost invisible darns in the
household linen. Such a woman scolds while she loves, and can only conceive
ideas of the very simplest; only the small change, as it were, of thought
passes current with her; she argues about everything, lives in chronic fear of
the unknown, makes constant forecasts, and is always thinking of the future.
Her statuesque yet girlish beauty, her engaging looks, her freshness, prevented
Cesar from thinking of her shortcomings ; and, moreover, she made up for them
by a woman's sensitive conscientiousness, an excessive thrift, by her fanatical
love of work, and genius as a sales- woman.
