Here, in brief, is the history of this household, so happy in itself, and
disturbed by none but business cares.  During the first year, Cesar instructed
his wife in all the ins and outs of the perfumery business, which she was
admirably quick to grasp ; she might have been brought into the world for that
sole purpose, so well did she adapt herself to her customers. The result of the
stocktaking at the end of the year alarmed the ambitious perfumer.  After
deducting all expenses, he might perhaps hope, in twenty years time, to make
the modest sum of a hundred thousand francs, the price of his felicity. He
determined then and there to find some speedier road to fortune, and, by way of
a beginning, to be a manufacturer as well as a retailer.  Acting against his
wife's counsel, he took the lease of a shed on some building land in the
Faubourg du Temple, and painted up thereon, in huge letters, CESAR BIROTTEAU'S
FACTORY. He enticed a workman from Grasse, and with him began to manufacture
several kinds of soap, essences, and eau-de-cologne, on the system of half
profits. The partnership only lasted six months, and ended in a loss, which ke
had to sustain alone ; but Birotteau did not lose heart. He meant to obtain a
result at any price, if it were only to escape a scolding from his wife; and,
indeed, he confessed to her afterwards that, in those days of despair, his head
used to boil like a pot on the fire, and that many a time, but for his
religious principles, he would have thrown himself into the Seine.  Birotteau
took up the work. It claimed to be a translation from the Arabic, but in
reality it was a sort of romance written by a physician in the previous
century. Cesar happened to stumble upon a passage therein which treated of
perfumes, and with his back against a tree in the boulevard, he turned the
pages over till he reached a footnote, wherein the learned author discoursed of
the nature of the dermis and epidermis.  The writer showed conclusively that
such and such an unguent or soap often produced an effect exactly opposite to
that intended, and the ointment, or the soap, acted as a tonic upon a skin that
required a lenitive treatment, or vice versa.  Birotteau saw a fortune in the
book, and bought it.  Yet, feeling little confidence in his unaided lights, he
went to Vauquelin, the celebrated chemist, and in all simplicity asked him how
to compose a double cosmetic which should produce the required effect upon the
human epidermis in either case. The really learned— men so truly great in this
sense that they can never receive in their lifetime all the fame that should
reward vast labours like theirs—are almost always helpful and kindly to the
poor in intellect. So it was with Vauquelin.  He came to the assistance of the
perfumer, gave him a formula for a paste to whiten the hands, and allowed him
to style himself its inventor. It was this cosmetic that Birotteau called the
Superfine Pate des Sultanes. The more thoroughly to accomplish his purpose, he
used the recipe for the paste for a wash for the complexion, which- he called
the Carminative Toilet Lotion.
