Most of the Italian cities looked upon their conqueror as a liberator—such was
the magic of the word liberty, which resounded from the Alps to the Apennines.
On his way to Mantua the General took up his residence in the palace of the
ancient dukes. Bonaparte promised the authorities of Mantua that their
department should be one of the most extensive; impressed on them the necessity
of promptly organising a local militia, and of putting in execution the plans
of Mari, the mathematician, for the navigation of the Mincio from Mantua to
Peschiera.  He stopped two days at Mantua, and the morrow of his arrival was
devoted to the celebration of a military funeral solemnity, in honour of
General Hoche, who had just died. His next object was to hasten the execution
of the monument which was erecting to the memory of Virgil. Thus, in one day,
he paid honour to France and Italy, to modern and to ancient glory, to the
laurels of war and to the laurels of poetry.  A person who saw Bonaparte on
this occasion for the first time thus described him in a letter he wrote to
Paris:—"With lively interest and extreme attention I have observed this
extraordinary man, who has performed such great deeds, and about whom there is
something which seems to indicate that his career is not yet terminated. I
found him very like his portraits—little, thin, pale, with an air of fatigue,
but not of ill-health, as has been reported of him. He appears to me to listen
with more abstraction than interest, and that he was more occupied with what he
was thinking of than with what was said to him. There is great intelligence in
his countenance, along with which may be marked an air of habitual meditation,
which reveals nothing of what is passing within. In that thinking head, in that
bold mind, it is impossible not to believe that some daring designs are
engendering which will have their influence an the destinies of Europe." From
the last phrase, in particular, of this letter, one might suspect that it was
written after Bonaparte had made his name feared throughout Europe; but it
really appeared in a journal in the month of December 1797, a little before his
arrival in Paris.  There exists a sort of analogy between celebrated men and
celebrated places; it was not, therefore, an uninteresting spectacle to see
Bonaparte surveying the field of Morat, where, in 1476, Charles the Bold, Duke
of Burgundy, daring like himself, fell with his powerful army under the effects
of Helvetian valour. Bonaparte slept during the night at Maudon, where, as in
every place through which he passed, the greatest honours were paid him. In the
morning, his carriage having broken down, we continued our journey an foot,
accompanied only by some officers and an escort of dragoons of the country.
Bonaparte stopped near the Ossuary, and desired to be shown the spot where the
battle of Morat was fought. A plain in front of the chapel was pointed out to
him. An officer who had served in France was present, and explained to him how
the Swiss, descending from the neighbouring mountains, were enabled, under
cover of a wood, to turn the Burgundian army and put it to the rout. "What was
the force of that army?" asked Bonaparte.—"Sixty thousand men."—"Sixty thousand
men!" he exclaimed: "they ought to have completely covered these
mountains!"—"The French fight better now," said Lannes, who was one of the
officers of his suite. "At that time," observed Bonaparte, interrupting him,
"the Burgundians were not Frenchmen." Bonaparte's journey through Switzerland
was not without utility; and his presence served to calm more than one
inquietude. He proceeded on his journey to Rastadt by Aix in Savoy, Berne, and
Bale. On arriving at Berne during night we passed through a double file of
well-lighted equipages, filled with beautiful women, all of whom raised the cry
of "Long live, Bonaparte!—long live the Pacificator!" To have a proper idea of
this genuine enthusiasm it is necessary to have seen it.  The position in
society to which his services had raised him rendered it unfit to address him
in the second person singular and the familiar manner sometimes used by his old
schoolfellows of Brienne. I thought, this very natural.
