On his arrival from Rastadt the most magnificent preparations were made at the
Luxembourg for the reception of Bonaparte. The grand court of the Palace was
elegantly ornamented; and at its farther end, close to the Palace, a large
amphitheatre was erected for the accommodation of official persons. Curiosity,
as on all like occasions, attracted multitudes, and the court was filled.
Opposite to the principal vestibule stood the altar of the country, surrounded
by the statues of Liberty, Equality, and Peace. When Bonaparte entered every
head was uncovered. The windows were full of young and beautiful females. But
notwithstanding this great preparation an icy coldness characterized the
ceremony. Every one seemed to be present only for the purpose of beholding a
sight, and curiosity was the prevailing expression rather than joy or
gratitude. It is but right to say, however, that an unfortunate event
contributed to the general indifference. The right wing of the Palace was not
occupied, but great preparations had been making there, and an officer had been
directed to prevent anyone from ascending. One of the clerks of the Directory,
however, contrived to get upon the scaffolding, but had scarcely placed his
foot on the first plank when it tilted up, and the imprudent man fell the whole
height into the court. This accident created a general stupor. Ladies fainted,
and the windows were nearly deserted.  However, the Directory displayed all the
Republican splendour of which they were so prodigal on similar occasions.
Speeches were far from being scarce. Talleyrand, who was then Minister for
Foreign Affairs, on introducing Bonaparte to the Directory, made a long
oration, in the course of which he hinted that the personal greatness of the
General ought not to excite uneasiness, even in a rising Republic. "Far from
apprehending anything from his ambition, I believe that we shall one day be
obliged to solicit him to tear himself from the pleasures of studious
retirement. All France will be free, but perhaps he never will; such is his
destiny." Talleyrand was listened to with impatience, so anxious was every one
to hear Bonaparte. The conqueror of Italy then rose, and pronounced with a
modest air, but in a firm voice, a short address of congratulation on the
improved position of the nation.  Barras, at that time President of the
Directory, replied to Bonaparte with so much prolixity as to weary everyone;
and as soon as he had finished speaking he threw himself into the arms of the
General, who was not much pleased with such affected displays, and gave him
what was then called the fraternal embrace. The other members of the Directory,
following the example of the President, surrounded Bonaparte and pressed him in
their arms; each acted, to the best of his ability, his part in the sentimental
comedy.  Chenier composed for this occasion a hymn, which Mehul set to music. A
few days after an opera was produced, bearing the title of the 'Fall of
Carthage', which was meant as an allusion to the anticipated exploits of the
conqueror of Italy, recently appointed to the command of the "Army of England." 
