The intrigues throughout Europe had not succeeded in causing the ports of that
island to be opened to us immediately on our arrival. Bonaparte expressed much
displeasure against the persons sent from Europe to arrange measures for that
purpose. One of them, however, M. Dolomieu, had cause to repent his mission,
which occasioned him to be badly treated by the Sicilians. M. Poussielgue had
done all he could in the way of seduction, but he had not completely succeeded.
There was some misunderstanding, and, in consequence, some shots were
interchanged. Bonaparte was very much pleased with General Baraguay d'Hilliers'
services in Italy. He could not but praise his military and political conduct
at Venice when, scarcely a year before, he had taken possession of that city by
his orders. General Baraguay d'Hilliers joined us with his division,—which had
embarked in the convoy that sailed from Genoa. The General-in-Chief ordered him
to land and attack the western part of the island. He executed this order with
equal prudence and ability, and highly to the satisfaction of the
General-in-Chief. As every person in the secret knew that all this was a mere
form, these hostile demonstrations produced no unpleasant consequences. We
wished to save the honour of the knights—that was all; for no one who has seen
Malta can imagine that an island surrounded with such formidable and perfect
fortifications would have surrendered in two days to a fleet which was pursued
by an enemy. The impregnable fortress of Malta is so secure against a 'coup de
main' that General Caffarelli, after examining its fortifications, said to the
General-in-Chief, in my presence, "Upon my word, General, it is luck: there is
some one in the town to open the gates for us." By comparing the observation of
General Caffarelli with what has been previously stated respecting the project
of the expedition to Egypt and Malta, an idea may be formed of the value of
Bonaparte's assertion at St. Helena: "The capture of Malta was not owing to
private intrigues, but to the sagacity of the Commander-in-chief. I took Malta
when I was in Mantua!" It is not the less true, however, that I wrote, by his
dictation, a mass of instructions for private intrigues. Napoleon also said to
another noble companion of his exile at St Helena, "Malta certainly possessed
vast physical means of resistance; but no moral means. The knights did nothing
dishonourable, nobody is obliged to do impossibilities. No; but they were sold;
the capture of Malta was assured before we left Toulon." The General-in-Chief
proceeded to that part of the port where the Turks made prisoners by the
knights were kept.  The disgusting galleys were emptied of their occupants: The
same principles which, a few days after, formed the basis of Bonaparte's
proclamation to the Egyptians, guided him in this act of reason and humanity.
He walked several times in the gardens of the grandmaster. They were in
beautiful order, and filled with magnificent orange-trees. We regaled ourselves
with their fruit, which the great heat rendered most delicious.  On the 19th of
June, after having settled the government and defence of the island, the
General left Malta, which he little dreamed he had taken for the English, who
have very badly requited the obligation. Many of the knights followed Bonaparte
and took civil and military appointments.  During the night of the 22d of June
the English squadron was almost close upon us. It passed at about six leagues
from the French fleet. Nelson, who learned the capture of Malta at Messina on
the day we left the island, sailed direct for Alexandria, without proceeding
into the north. He considered that city to be the place of our destination. By
taking the shortest course, with every sail set, and unembarrassed by any
convoy, he arrived before Alexandria on the 28th of June, three days before the
French fleet, which, nevertheless, had sailed before him from the shores of
Malta. The French squadron took the direction of Candia, which we perceived on
the 25th of June, and afterwards stood to the south, favoured by the Etesian
winds, which regularly prevail at that season. The French fleet did not reach
Alexandria till the 30th of June.
