He was indulgent towards women and poor people, on whom the burden of human
society rest. He said, "The faults of women, of children, of the feeble, the
indigent, and the ignorant, are the fault of the husbands, the fathers, the
masters, the strong, the rich, and the wise." He said, moreover, "Teach those
who are ignorant as many things as possible; society is culpable, in that it
does not afford instruction gratis; it is responsible for the night which it
produces. This soul is full of shadow; sin is therein committed. The guilty one
is not the person who has committed the sin, but the person who has created the
shadow." It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of
judging things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.  One day he
heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on the point of trial,
discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being at the end of his resources,
had coined counterfeit money, out of love for a woman, and for the child which
he had had by her. Counterfeiting was still punishable with death at that
epoch. The woman had been arrested in the act of passing the first false piece
made by the man. She was held, but there were no proofs except against her. She
alone could accuse her lover, and destroy him by her confession. She denied;
they insisted. She persisted in her denial. Thereupon an idea occurred to the
attorney for the crown. He invented an infidelity on the part of the lover, and
succeeded, by means of fragments of letters cunningly presented, in persuading
the unfortunate woman that she had a rival, and that the man was deceiving her.
Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy, she denounced her lover, confessed all,
proved all.  The man was ruined. He was shortly to be tried at Aix with his
accomplice. They were relating the matter, and each one was expressing
enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousy into
play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he had educed the
justice of revenge. The Bishop listened to all this in silence. When they had
finished, he inquired,— "Where are this man and woman to be tried?" "At the
Court of Assizes." He went on, "And where will the advocate of the crown be
tried?" A tragic event occurred at D—— A man was condemned to death for murder.
He was a wretched fellow, not exactly educated, not exactly ignorant, who had
been a mountebank at fairs, and a writer for the public. The town took a great
interest in the trial. On the eve of the day fixed for the execution of the
condemned man, the chaplain of the prison fell ill. A priest was needed to
attend the criminal in his last moments. They sent for the cure. It seems that
he refused to come, saying, "That is no affair of mine. I have nothing to do
with that unpleasant task, and with that mountebank: I, too, am ill; and
besides, it is not my place." This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said,
"Monsieur le Curé is right: it is not his place; it is mine."
