When on board the 'Orient' he took pleasure in conversing frequently with Monge
and Berthollet. The subjects on which they usually talked were chemistry,
mathematics, and religion. General Caffarelli, whose conversation, supplied by
knowledge, was at once energetic, witty, and lively, was one of those with whom
he most willingly discoursed. Whatever friendship he might entertain for
Berthollet, it was easy to perceive that he preferred Monge, and that he was
led to that preference because Monge, endowed with an ardent imagination,
without exactly possessing religious principles, had a kind of predisposition
for religious ideas which harmonised with the notions of Bonaparte. On this
subject Berthollet sometimes rallied his inseparable friend Monge. Besides,
Berthollet was, with his cold imagination, constantly devoted to analysis and
abstractions, inclined towards materialism, an opinion with which the General
was always much dissatisfied.  Bonaparte sometimes conversed with Admiral
Brueys. His object was always to gain information respecting the different
manoeuvres, and nothing astonished the Admiral more than the sagacity of his
questions. I recollect that one day, Bonaparte having asked Brueys in what
manner the hammocks were disposed of when clearing for action, he declared,
after he had received an answer, that if the case should occur he would order
every one to throw his baggage overboard.  He passed a great part of his time
in his cabin, lying on a bed, which, swinging on a kind of castors, alleviated
the severity of the sea-sickness from which he frequently suffered much when
the ship rolled.  I was almost always with him in his cabin, where I read to
him some of the favourite works which he had selected for his camp library. He
also frequently conversed, for hours together, with the captains of the vessels
which he hailed. He never failed to ask whence they came? what was their
destination? what ships they had met? what course they had sailed? His
curiosity being thus satisfied, he allowed them to continue their voyage, after
making them promise to say nothing of having seen the French squadron.  Whilst
we were at sea he seldom rose before ten o'clock in the morning. The 'Orient'
had the appearance of a populous town, from which women had been excluded; and
this floating city was inhabited by 2000 individuals, amongst whom were a great
number of distinguished men. Bonaparte every day invited several persons to
dine with him, besides Brueys, Berthier, the colonels, and his ordinary
household, who were always present at the table of the General-in-Chief. When
the weather was fine he went up to the quarter-deck, which, from its extent,
formed a grand promenade.  I recollect once that when walking the quarter-deck
with him whilst we were in Sicilian waters I thought I could see the summits of
the Alps beautifully lighted by the rays of the setting sun. Bonaparte laughed
much, and joked me about it. He called Admiral Brueys, who took his telescope
and soon confirmed my conjecture. The Alps!  At the mention of that word by the
Admiral I think I can see Bonaparte still. He stood for a long time motionless;
then, suddenly bursting from his trance, exclaimed, "No! I cannot behold the
land of Italy without emotion! There is the East: and there I go; a perilous
enterprise invites me. Those mountains command the plains where I so often had
the good fortune to lead the French to victory. With them we will conquer
again."
