One of Bonaparte's greatest pleasures during the voyage was, after dinner, to
fix upon three or four persons to support a proposition and as many to oppose
it. He had an object in view by this. These discussions afforded him an
opportunity of studying the minds of those whom he had an interest in knowing
well, in order that he might afterwards confide to each the functions for which
he possessed the greatest aptitude: It will not appear singular to those who
have been intimate with Bonaparte, that in these intellectual contests he gave
the preference to those who had supported an absurd proposition with ability
over those who had maintained the cause of reason; and it was not superiority
of mind which determined his judgment, for he really preferred the man who
argued well in favour of an absurdity to the man who argued equally well in
support of a reasonable proposition. He always gave out the subjects which were
to be discussed; and they most frequently turned upon questions of religion,
the different kinds of government, and the art of war. One day he asked whether
the planets were inhabited; on another, what was the age of the world; then he
proposed to consider the probability of the destruction of our globe, either by
water or fire; at another time, the truth or fallacy of presentiments, and the
interpretation of dreams. I remember the circumstance which gave rise to the
last proposition was an allusion to Joseph, of whom he happened to speak, as he
did of almost everything connected with the country to which we were bound, and
which that able administrator had governed. No country came under Bonaparte's
observation without recalling historical recollections to his mind. On passing
the island of Candia his imagination was excited, and he spoke with enthusiasm
of ancient Crete and the Colossus, whose fabulous renown has surpassed all
human glories. He spoke much of the fall of the empire of the East, which bore
so little resemblance to what history has preserved of those fine countries, so
often moistened with the blood of man. The ingenious fables of mythology
likewise occurred to his mind, and imparted to his language something of a
poetical, and, I may say, of an inspired character. The sight of the kingdom of
Minos led him to reason on the laws best calculated for the government of
nations; and the birthplace of Jupiter suggested to him the necessity of a
religion for the mass of mankind. This animated conversation lasted until the
favourable north winds, which drove the clouds into the valley of the Nile,
caused us to lose sight of the island of Candia.  The musicians on board the
Orient sometimes played serenades; but only between decks, for Bonaparte was
not yet sufficiently fond of music to wish to hear it in his cabin. It may be
said that his taste for this art increased in the direct ratio of his power;
and so it was with his taste for hunting, of which he gave no indication until
after his elevation to the empire; as though he had wished to prove that he
possessed within himself not only the genius of sovereignty for commanding men,
but also the instinct for those aristocratical pleasures, the enjoyment of
which is considered by mankind to be amongst the attributes of kings.  It is
scarcely possible that some accidents should not occur during a long voyage in
a crowded vessel—that some persons should not fall overboard. Accidents of this
kind frequently happened on board the 'Orient'. On those occasions nothing was
more remarkable than the great humanity of the man who has since been so
prodigal of the blood of his fellow-creatures on the field of battle, and who
was about to shed rivers of it even in Egypt, whither we were bound. When a man
fell into the sea the General-in-Chief was in a state of agitation till he was
saved. He instantly had the ship hove-to, and exhibited the greatest uneasiness
until the unfortunate individual was recovered. He ordered me to reward those
who ventured their lives in this service. Amongst these was a sailor who had
incurred punishment for some fault. He not only exempted him from the
punishment, but also gave him some money. I recollect that one dark night we
heard a noise like that occasioned by a man falling into the sea. Bonaparte
instantly caused the ship to be hove-to until the supposed victim was rescued
from certain death. The men hastened from all sides, and at length they picked
up-what?—the quarter of a bullock, which had fallen from the hook to which it
was hung. What was Bonaparte's conduct? He ordered me to reward the sailors who
had exerted themselves in this occasion even more generously than usual,
saying, "It might have been a sailor, and these brave fellows have shown as
much activity and courage as if it had."
