During the voyage, and particularly between Malta and Alexandria, I often
conversed with the brave and unfortunate Admiral Brueys. The intelligence we
heard from time to time augmented his uneasiness. I had the good fortune to
obtain the confidence of this worthy man. He complained bitterly of the
imperfect manner in which the fleet had been prepared for sea; of the
encumbered state of the ships of the line and frigates, and especially of the
'Orient'; of the great number of transports; of the bad Outfit of all the ships
and the weakness of their crews. He assured me that it required no little
courage to undertake the command of a fleet so badly equipped; and he often
declared, that in the event of our falling in with the enemy, he could not
answer for the consequences. The encumbered state of the vessels, the immense
quantity of civic and military baggage which each person had brought, and would
wish to save, would render proper manoeuvres impracticable. In case of an
attack, added Brueys, even by an inferior squadron, the confusion and disorder
amongst so great a number of persons would produce an inevitable catastrophe.
Finally, if the English had appeared with ten vessels only, the Admiral could
not have guaranteed a fortunate result. He considered victory to be a thing
that was impossible, and even with a victory, what would have become of the
expedition? "God send," he said, with a sigh, "that we may pass the English
without meeting them!" He appeared to foresee what did afterwards happen to
him, not in the open sea, but in a situation which he considered much more
favourable to his defence.  On the morning of the 1st of July the expedition
arrived off the coast of Africa, and the column of Septimus-Severus pointed out
to us the city of Alexandria. Our situation and frame of mind hardly permitted
us to reflect that in the distant point we beheld the city of the Ptolemies and
Caesars, with its double port, its pharos, and the gigantic monuments of its
ancient grandeur. Our imaginations did not rise to this pitch.  Admiral Brueys
had sent on before the frigate Juno to fetch M. Magallon, the French Consul. It
was near four o'clock when he arrived, and the sea was very rough. He informed
the General-in-Chief that Nelson had been off Alexandria on the 28th—that he
immediately dispatched a brig to obtain intelligence from the English agent. On
the return of the brig Nelson instantly stood away with his squadron towards
the north-east. But for a delay which our convoy from Civita Vecchia
occasioned, we should have been on this coast at the same time as Nelson.  It
appeared that Nelson supposed us to be already at Alexandria when he arrived
there. He had reason to suppose so, seeing that we left Malta on the 19th of
June, whilst he did not sail from Messina till the 21st. Not finding us where
he expected, and being persuaded we ought to have arrived there had Alexandria
been the place of our destination; he sailed for Alexandretta in Syria, whither
he imagined we had gone to effect a landing. This error saved the expedition a
second time.  Bonaparte, on hearing the details which the French Consul
communicated, resolved to disembark immediately. Admiral Brueys represented the
difficulties and dangers of a disembarkation—the violence of the surge, the
distance from the coast,—a coast, too, lined with reefs of rocks, the
approaching night, and our perfect ignorance of the points suitable for
landing. The Admiral, therefore, urged the necessity of waiting till next
morning; that is to say, to delay the landing twelve hours. He observed that
Nelson could not return from Syria for several days. Bonaparte listened to
these representations with impatience and ill-humour. He replied peremptorily,
"Admiral, we have no time to lose. Fortune gives me but three days; if I do not
profit by them we are lost." He relied much on fortune; this chimerical idea
constantly influenced his resolutions.  Bonaparte having the command of the
naval as well as the military force, the Admiral was obliged to yield to his
wishes.  I attest these facts, which passed in my presence, and no part of
which could escape my observation. It is quite false that it was owing to the
appearance of a sail which, it is pretended, was descried, but of which, for my
part, I saw nothing, that Bonaparte exclaimed, "Fortune, have you abandoned me?
I ask only five days!" No such thing occurred.
