It was one o'clock in the morning of the 2d of July when we landed on the soil
of Egypt, at Marabou, three leagues to the west of Alexandria. We had to regret
the loss of some lives; but we had every reason to expect that our losses would
have been greater.  At three o'clock the same morning the General-in-Chief
marched on Alexandria with the divisions of Kléber, Bon, and Menou. The Bedouin
Arabs, who kept hovering about our right flank and our rear, picked up the
stragglers.  Having arrived within gunshot of Alexandria, we scaled the
ramparts, and French valour soon triumphed over all obstacles.  The first blood
I saw shed in war was General Kléber's. He was struck in the head by a ball,
not in storming the walls, but whilst heading the attack. He came to Pompey's
Pillar, where many members of the staff were assembled, and where the
General-in-Chief was watching the attack. I then spoke to Kléber for the first
time, and from that day our friendship commenced. I had the good fortune to
contribute somewhat towards the assistance of which he stood in need, and
which, as we were situated, could not be procured very easily.  It has been
endeavoured to represent the capture of Alexandria, which surrendered after a
few hours, as a brilliant exploit. The General-in-Chief himself wrote that the
city had been taken after a few discharges of cannon; the walls, badly
fortified, were soon scaled. Alexandria was not delivered up to pillage, as has
been asserted, and often repeated. This would have been a most impolitic mode
of commencing the conquest of Egypt, which had no strong places requiring to be
intimidated by a great example.  Bonaparte, with some others, entered the city
by a narrow street which scarcely allowed two persons to walk abreast; I was
with him. We were stopped by some musket-shots fired from a low window by a man
and a woman. They repeated their fire several times. The guides who preceded
their General kept up a heavy fire on the window. The man and woman fell dead,
and we passed on in safety, for the place had surrendered.  Bonaparte employed
the six days during which he remained in Alexandria in establishing order in
the city and province, with that activity and superior talent which I could
never sufficiently admire, and in directing the march of the army across the
province of Bohahire'h. He sent Desaix with 4500 infantry and 60 cavalry to
Beda, on the road to Damanhour. This general was the first to experience the
privations and sufferings which the whole army had soon to endure. His great
mind, his attachment to Bonaparte, seemed for a moment about to yield to the
obstacles which presented themselves. On the 15th of July he wrote from
Bohahire'h as follows: "I beseech you do not let us stop longer in this
position. My men are discouraged and murmur. Make us advance or fall back
without delay. The villages consist merely of huts, absolutely without
resources." In these immense plains, scorched by the vertical rays of a burning
sun, water, everywhere else so common, becomes an object of contest. The wells
and springs, those secret treasures of the desert, are carefully concealed from
the travellers; and frequently, after our most oppressive marches, nothing
could be found to allay the urgent cravings of thirst but a little brackish
water of the most disgusting description.
