Perree, at considerable risk, despatched several persons to inform the
General-in-Chief of the desperate situation of the flotilla. The cannonade
which Bonaparte had heard since the morning, and the explosion of a Turkish
gunboat, which was blown up by the artillery of the xebec, led him to fear that
our situation was really perilous. He therefore made a movement to the left, in
the direction of the Nile and Chebreisse, beat the Mamelukes, and forced them
to retire on Cairo. At sight of the French troops the commander of the Turkish
flotilla weighed anchor and sailed up the Nile. The two banks of the river were
evacuated, and the flotilla escaped the destruction which a short time before
had appeared inevitable. Some writers have alleged that the Turkish flotilla
was destroyed in this engagement. The truth is, the Turks did us considerable
injury, while on their part they suffered but little. We had twenty men killed
and several wounded. Upwards of 1500 cannon-shots were fired during the action.
General Berthier, in his narrative of the Egyptian expedition, enumerates the
individuals who, though not in the military service, assisted Perree in this
unequal and dangerous engagement. He mentions Monge, Berthollet, Andreossy, the
paymaster, Junot, and Bourrienne, secretary to the General-in-Chief. It has
also been stated that Sucy, the commissary-general, was seriously wounded while
bravely defending a gunboat laden with provisions; but this is incorrect.  We
had no communication with the army until the 23d of July. On the 22d we came in
sight of the Pyramids, and were informed that we were only about, ten leagues
from Gizeh, where they are situated. The cannonade which we heard, and which
augmented in proportion as the north wind diminished, announced a serious
engagement; and that same day we saw the banks of the Nile strewed with heaps
of bodies, which the waves were every moment washing into the sea. This
horrible spectacle, the silence of the surrounding villages, which had hitherto
been armed against us, and the cessation of the firing from the banks of the
river, led us to infer, with tolerable certainty, that a battle fatal to the
Mamelukes had been fought. The misery we suffered on our passage from
Rahmahanie'h to Gizeh is indescribable. We lived for eleven days on melons and
water, besides being momentarily exposed to the musketry of the Arabs and the
fellahs. We luckily escaped with but a few killed and wounded. The rising of
the Nile was only beginning. The shallowness of the river near Cairo obliged us
to leave the xebec and get on board a djerm. We reached Gizeh at three in the
afternoon of the 23d of July.  When I saluted the General, whom I had not seen
for twelve days, he thus addressed me: "So you are here, are you? Do you know
that you have all of you been the cause of my not following up the battle of
Chebreisse? It was to save you, Monge, Berthollet, and the others on board the
flotilla that I hurried the movement of my left upon the Nile before my right
had turned Chebreisse. But for that, not a single Mameluke would have escaped."
"I thank you for my own part," replied I; "but in conscience could you have
abandoned us, after taking away our horses, and making us go on board the
xebec, whether we would or not?" He laughed, and then told me how sorry he was
for the wound of Sucy, and the death of many useful men, whose places could not
possibly be filled up.  He made me write a letter to his brother Louis,
informing him that he had gained a complete victory over the Mamelukes at
Embabeh, opposite Boulac, and that the enemy's loss was 2000 men killed and
wounded, 40 guns, and a great number of horses.  The occupation of Cairo was
the immediate consequence of the victory of Embabeh. Bonaparte established his
head-quarters in the home of Elfy Bey, in the great square of Ezbekye'h.  The
march of the French army to Cairo was attended by an uninterrupted succession
of combats and victories. We had won the battles of Rahmahanie'h, Chebreisse,
and the Pyramids. The Mamelukes were defeated, and their chief, Mourad Bey, was
obliged to fly into Upper Egypt. Bonaparte found no obstacle to oppose his
entrance into the capital of Egypt, after a campaign of only twenty days.
