The General-in-Chief had a Turkish dress made, which he once put on, merely in
joke. One day he desired me to go to breakfast without waiting for him, and
that he would follow me. In about a quarter of an hour he made his appearance
in his new costume. As soon as he was recognised he was received with a loud
burst of laughter. He sat down very coolly; but he found himself so encumbered
and ill at ease in his turban and Oriental robe that he speedily threw them
off, and was never tempted to a second performance of the masquerade.  About
the end of August Bonaparte wished to open negotiations with the Pasha of Acre,
nicknamed the Butcher. He offered Djezzar his friendship, sought his in return,
and gave him the most consolatory assurances of the safety of his dominions. He
promised to support him against the Grand Seignior, at the very moment when he
was assuring the Egyptians that he would support the Grand Seignior against the
beys. But Djezzar, confiding in his own strength and in the protection of the
English, who had anticipated Bonaparte, was deaf to every overture, and would
not even receive Beauvoisin, who was sent to him on the 22d of August. A second
envoy was beheaded at Acre. The occupations of Bonaparte and the necessity of
obtaining a more solid footing in Egypt retarded for the moment the invasion of
that pashalic, which provoked vengeance by its barbarities, besides being a
dangerous neighbour.  From the time he received the accounts of the disaster of
Aboukir until the revolt of Cairo on the 22d of October, Bonaparte sometimes
found the time hang heavily on his hands. Though he devoted attention to
everything, yet there was not sufficient occupation for his singularly active
mind. When the heat was not too great he rode on horseback; and on his return,
if he found no despatches to read (which often happened), no orders to send
off; or no letters to answer, he was immediately absorbed in reverie, and would
sometimes converse very strangely. One day, after a long pause, he said to me:
"Do you know what I am thinking of?"—"Upon my word, that would be very
difficult; you think of such extraordinary things."—"I don't know," continued
he, "that I shall ever see France again; but if I do, my only ambition is to
make a glorious campaign in Germany—in the plains of Bavaria; there to gain a
great battle, and to avenge France for the defeat of Hochstadt. After that I
would retire into the country, and live quietly." He then entered upon a long
dissertation on the preference he would give to Germany as the theatre of war;
the fine character of the people, and the prosperity and wealth of the country,
and its power of supporting an army. His conversations were sometimes very
long; but always replete with interest.
