This connection soon became the general subject of gossip at head-quarters.
Through a feeling of delicacy to M. Foures, the General-in-Chief gave him a
mission to the Directory. He embarked at Alexandria, and the ship was captured
by the English, who, being informed of the cause of his mission, were malicious
enough to send him back to Egypt, instead of keeping him prisoner. Bonaparte
wished to have a child by Madame Foures, but this wish was not realised.  A
celebrated soothsayer was recommended to Bonaparte by the inhabitants of Cairo,
who confidentially vouched for the accuracy with which he could foretell future
events. He was sent for, and when he arrived, I, Venture, and a sheik were with
the General. The prophet wished first to exercise his skill upon Bonaparte,
who, however, proposed that I should have my fortune told first, to which I
acceded without hesitation. To afford an idea of his prophetic skill I must
mention that since my arrival in Cairo I had been in a very weak state. The
passage of the Nile and the bad food we had had for twelve days had greatly
reduced me, so that I was miserably pale and thin.  After examining my hands,
feeling my pulse, my forehead, and the nape of my neck, the fortune-teller
shrugged his shoulders, and, in a melancholy tone, told Venture that he did not
think it right to inform me of my fate. I gave him to understand that he might
say what he pleased, as it was a matter of indifference to me. After
considerable hesitation on his part and pressing on mine, he announced to me
that the earth of Egypt would receive me in two months.  I thanked him, and he
was dismissed. When we were alone the General said to me, "Well, what do you
think of that?" I observed that the fortune-teller did not run any great risk
in foretelling my death, which was a very probable circumstance in the state in
which I was; "but," added I, "if I procure the wines which I have ordered from
France, you will soon see me get round again." The art of imposing on mankind
has at all times been an important part of the art of governing; and it was not
that portion of the science of government which Bonaparte was the least
acquainted with. He neglected no opportunity of showing off to the Egyptians
the superiority of France in arts and sciences; but it happened, oftener than
once, that the simple instinct of the Egyptians thwarted his endeavours in this
way. Some days after the visit of the pretended fortune-teller he wished, if I
may so express myself, to oppose conjurer to conjurer. For this purpose he
invited the principal sheiks to be present at some chemical experiments
performed by M. Berthollet. The General expected to be much amused at their
astonishment; but the miracles of the transformation of liquids, electrical
commotions and galvanism, did not elicit from them any symptom of surprise.
They witnessed the operations of our able chemist with the most imperturbable
indifference. When they were ended, the sheik El Bekri desired the interpreter
to tell M. Berthollet that it was all very fine; "but," said he, "ask him
whether he can make me be in Morocco and here at one and the same moment?" M.
Berthollet replied in the negative, with a shrug of his shoulders. "Oh! then,"
said the sheik, "he is not half a sorcerer." Our music produced no greater
effect upon them. They listened with insensibility to all the airs that were
played to them, with the exception of "Marlbrook." When that was played they
became animated, and were all in motion, as if ready to dance.  An order which
had been issued on our arrival in Cairo for watching the criers of the mosques
had for some weeks been neglected. At certain hours of the night these criers
address prayers to the Prophet. As it was merely a repetition of the same
ceremony over and over again, in a short time no notice was taken of it. The
Turks, perceiving this negligence, substituted for their prayers and hymns
cries of revolt, and by this sort of verbal telegraph, insurrectionary
excitement was transmitted to the northern and southern extremities of Egypt.
By this means, and by the aid of secret emissaries, who eluded our feeble
police, and circulated real or forged firmans of the Sultan disavowing the
concord between France and the Porte, and provoking war, the plan of a
revolution was organised throughout the country.
