The signal for the execution of this plan was given from the minarets on the
night of the 20th of October, and on the morning of the 21st it was announced
at headquarters that the city of Cairo was in open insurrection. The
General-in-Chief was not, as has been stated, in the isle of Raeuddah: he did
not hear the firing of the alarm-guns. He rose when the news arrived; it was
then five o'clock. He was informed that all the shops were closed, and that the
French were attacked. A moment after he heard of the death of General Dupuis,
commandant of the garrison, who was killed by a lance in the street. Bonaparte
immediately mounted his horse, and, accompanied by only thirty guides, visited
all the threatened points, restored confidence, and, with great presence of
mind, adopted measures of defence.  He left me at headquarters with only one
sentinel; but he had been accurately informed of the situation of the
insurgents; and such was my confidence in his activity and foresight that I had
no apprehension, and awaited his return with perfect composure. This composure
was not disturbed even when I saw a party of insurgents attack the house of M.
Estève, our paymaster-general, which was situated on the opposite side of
Ezbekye'h Place. M. Estève was, fortunately, able to resist the attack until
troops from Boulac came up to his assistance.  After visiting all the posts,
and adopting every precautionary measure, Bonaparte returned to headquarters.
Finding me still alone with the sentinel, he asked me, smiling, "whether I had
not been frightened?"—"Not at all, General, I assure you," replied I.  —It was
about half-past eight in the morning when Bonaparte returned to headquarters,
and while at breakfast he was informed that some Bedouin Arabs, on horseback,
were trying to force their entrance into Cairo. He ordered his aide de camp,
Sulkowsky, to mount his horse, to take with him fifteen guides, and proceed to
the point where the assailants were most numerous. This was the Bab-el-Nasser,
or the gate of victory. Croisier observed to the General-in-Chief that
Sulkowsky had scarcely recovered from the wounds at Salehye'h, and he offered
to take his place. He had his motives for this. Bonaparte consented; but
Sulkowsky had already set out. Within an hour after, one of the fifteen guides
returned, covered with blood, to announce that Sulkowsky and the remainder of
his party had been cut to pieces. This was speedy work, for we were still at
table when the sad news arrived.  Mortars were planted on Mount Mokatam, which
commands Cairo. The populace, expelled from all the principal streets by the
troops, assembled in the square of the Great Mosque, and in the little streets
running into it, which they barricaded. The firing of the artillery on the
heights was kept up with vigour for two days.  About twelve of the principal
chiefs of Cairo were arrested and confined in an apartment at headquarters.
They awaited with the calmest resignation the death they knew they merited; but
Bonaparte merely detained them as hostages. The aga in the service of Bonaparte
was astonished that sentence of death was not pronounced upon them; and he
said, shrugging his shoulders, and with a gesture apparently intended to
provoke severity, "You see they expect it." On the third the insurrection was
at an end, and tranquillity restored. Numerous prisoners were conducted to the
citadel. In obedience to an order which I wrote every evening, twelve were put
to death nightly. The bodies were then put into sacks and thrown into the Nile.
There were many women included in these nocturnal executions.  I am not aware
that the number of victims amounted to thirty per day, as Bonaparte assured
General Reynier in a letter which he wrote to him six days after the
restoration of tranquillity. "Every night," said he, "we cut off thirty heads.
This, I hope, will be an effectual example." I am of opinion that in this
instance he exaggerated the extent of his just revenge.
