Since the month of August the attention of General Bonaparte had been
constantly fixed on Syria. The period of the possible landing of an enemy in
Egypt had now passed away, and could not return until the month of July in the
following year. Bonaparte was fully convinced that that landing would take
place, and he was not deceived. The Ottoman Porte had, indeed, been persuaded
that the conquest of Egypt was not in her interest. She preferred enduring a
rebel whom she hoped one day to subdue to supporting a power which, under the
specious pretext of reducing her insurgent beys to obedience, deprived her of
one of her finest provinces, and threatened the rest of the empire.  On his
return to Cairo the General-in-Chief had no longer any doubt as to the course
which the Porte intended to adopt. The numerous class of persons who believed
that the Ottoman Porte had consented to our occupation of Egypt were suddenly
undeceived. It was then asked how we could, without that consent, have
attempted such an enterprise? Nothing, it was said, could justify the temerity
of such an expedition, if it should produce a rupture between France, the
Ottoman empire, and its allies. However, for the remainder of the year
Bonaparte dreaded nothing except an expedition from Gaza and El-Arish, of which
the troops of Djezzar had already taken possession. This occupation was justly
regarded as a decided act of hostility; war was thus practically declared. "We
must adopt anticipatory measures," thought Napoleon; "we must destroy this
advanced guard of the Ottoman empire, overthrow the ramparts of Jaffa and Acre,
ravage the country, destroy all her resources, so as to render the passage of
an army across the desert impracticable." Thus was planned the expedition
against Syria.  General Berthier, after repeated entreaties, had obtained
permission to return to France. The 'Courageuse' frigate, which was to convey
him home, was fitting out at Alexandria; he had received his instructions, and
was to leave Cairo on the 29th of January, ten days before Bonaparte's
departure for Syria. Bonaparte was sorry to part with him; but he could not
endure to see an old friend, and one who had served him well in all his
campaigns, dying before his eyes, the victim of nostalgia and romantic love.
Besides, Berthier had been for some time past, anything but active in the
discharge of his duties. His passion, which amounted almost to madness,
impaired the feeble faculties with which nature had endowed him. Some writers
have ranked him in the class of sentimental lovers: be this as it may, the
homage which Berthier rendered to the portrait of the object of his adoration
more frequently excited our merriment than our sensibility.  One day I went
with an order from Bonaparte to the chief of his staff, whom I found on his
knees before the portrait of Madame Visconti, which was hanging opposite the
door. I touched him, to let him know I was there. He grumbled a little, but did
not get angry.  The moment was approaching when the two friends were to part,
perhaps forever. Bonaparte was sincerely distressed at this separation, and the
chief of his staff was informed of the fact. At a moment when it was supposed
Berthier was on his way to Alexandria, he presented himself to the
General-in-Chief. "You are, then, decidedly going to Asia?" said he.—"You
know," replied the General, "that all is ready, and I shall set out in a few
days."—"Well, I will not leave you. I voluntarily renounce all idea of
returning to France. I could not endure to forsake you at a moment when you are
going to encounter new dangers. Here are my instructions and my passport."
Bonaparte, highly pleased with this resolution, embraced Berthier; and the
coolness which had been excited by his request to return home was succeeded by
a sincere reconciliation.  Louis Bonaparte, who was suffering from the effects
of the voyage, was still at Alexandria. The General-in-Chief, yielding to the
pacific views of his younger brother, who was also beginning to evince some
symptoms of nostalgia, consented to his return home. He could not, however,
depart until the 11th of March 1799. I felt the absence of Louis very much.
