On the 11th of February 1799 we began our march for Syria, with about 12,000
men. It has been erroneously stated that the army amounted to only 6000: nearly
that number was lost in the course of the campaign. However, at the very moment
we were on our way to Syria, with 12,000 men, scarcely as many being left in
Egypt, the Directory published that, "according to the information which had
been received," we had 60,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry; that the army had
doubled its numbers by battles; and that since our arrival in Egypt, we had
lost only 300 men. Is history to be written from such documents?  We arrived,
about four o'clock in the afternoon, at Messoudiah, or, "the Fortunate Spot."
Here we witnessed a kind of phenomenon, which was not a little agreeable to us.
Messoudiah is a place situated on the coast of the Mediterranean, surrounded
with little dunes of very fine sand, which the copious rains of winter readily
penetrate. The rain remains in the sand, so that on making with the fingers
holes of four or five inches in depth at the bottom of these little hills, the
water immediately flows out. This water was, indeed, rather thick, but its
flavour was agreeable; and it would have become clear if we could have spared
time to allow it to rest and deposit the particles of sand it contained.  It
was a curious spectacle to behold us all lying prostrate, digging wells in
miniature; and displaying a laughable selfishness in our endeavours to obtain
the most abundant source. This was a very important discovery to us. We found
these sand-wells at the extremity of the desert, and it contributed, in no
small degree, to revive the courage of our soldiers; besides, when men are, as
was the case with us, subject to privations of every kind, the least benefit
which accrues inspires the hope of a new advantage. We were approaching the
confines of Syria, and we enjoyed by anticipation, the pleasure we were about
to experience, on treading a soil which, by its variety of verdure and
vegetation, would remind us of our native land. At Messoudiah we likewise
possessed the advantage of bathing in the sea, which was not more than fifty
paces from our unexpected water-supply.  Whilst near the wells of Messoudiah,
on the way to El-Arish, I one day saw Bonaparte walking alone with Junot, as he
was often in the habit of doing. I stood at a little distance, and my eyes, I
know not why, were fixed on him during their conversation. The General's
countenance, which was always pale, had, without my being able to divine the
cause, become paler than usual. There was something convulsive in his
features—a wildness in his look, and he several times struck his head with his
hand. After conversing with Junot about a quarter of an hour he quitted him and
came towards me. I never saw him exhibit such an air of dissatisfaction, or
appear so much under the influence of some prepossession. I advanced towards
him, and as soon as we met, he exclaimed in an abrupt and angry tone, "So! I
find I cannot depend upon you.—These women!—Josephine! —if you had loved me,
you would before now have told me all I have heard from Junot—he is a real
friend—Josephine!—and I 600 leagues from her—you ought to have told me.—That
she should thus have deceived me!—'Woe to them!—I will exterminate the whole
race of fops and puppies!—As to her—divorce!—yes, divorce! a public and open
divorce!—I must write!—I know all!—It is your fault—you ought to have told me!"
These energetic and broken exclamations, his disturbed countenance and altered
voice informed me but too well of the subject of his conversation with Junot. I
saw that Junot had been drawn into a culpable indiscretion; and that, if
Josephine had committed any faults, he had cruelly exaggerated them. My
situation was one of extreme delicacy. However, I had the good fortune to
retain my self-possession, and as soon as some degree of calmness succeeded to
this first burst, I replied that I knew nothing of the reports which Junot
might have communicated to him; that even if such reports, often the offspring
of calumny, had reached my ear, and if I had considered it my duty to inform
him of them, I certainly would not have selected for that purpose the moment
when he was 600 leagues from France. I also did not conceal how blamable
Junot's conduct appeared to me, and how ungenerous I considered it thus rashly
to accuse a woman who was not present to justify or defend herself; that it was
no great proof of attachment to add domestic uneasiness to the anxiety, already
sufficiently great, which the situation of his brothers in arms, at the
commencement of a hazardous enterprise, occasioned him.
