On arriving before Jaffa, where there were already some troops, the first
person I met was Adjutant-General Gresieux, with whom I was well acquainted. I
wished him good-day, and offered him my hand. "Good God! what are you about?"
said he, repulsing me with a very abrupt gesture; "you may have the plague.
People do not touch each other here!" I mentioned the circumstance to
Bonaparte, who said, "If he be afraid of the plague, he will die of it."
Shortly after, at St. Jean d'Acre, he was attacked by that malady, and soon
sank under it.  On the 4th of March we commenced the siege of Jaffa. That
paltry place, which, to round a sentence, was pompously styled the ancient
Joppa, held out only to the 6th of March, when it was taken by storm, and given
up to pillage. The massacre was horrible. General Bonaparte sent his aides de
camp Beauharnais and Croisier to appease the fury of the soldiers as much as
possible, and to report to him what was passing. They learned that a
considerable part of the garrison had retired into some vast buildings, a sort
of caravanserai, which formed a large enclosed court. Beauharnais and Croisier,
who were distinguished by wearing the 'aide de camp' scarf on their arms,
proceeded to that place. The Arnauts and Albanians, of whom these refugees were
almost entirely composed, cried from the windows that they were willing to
surrender upon an assurance that they would be exempted from the massacre to
which the town was doomed; if not, they threatened to fire on the 'aides de
camp', and to defend themselves to the last extremity. The two officers thought
that they ought to accede to the proposition, notwithstanding the decree of
death which had been pronounced against the whole garrison, in consequence of
the town being taken by storm. They brought them to our camp in two divisions,
one consisting of about 2500 men, the other of about 1600.  I was walking with
General Bonaparte, in front of his tent, when he beheld this mass of men
approaching, and before he even saw his 'aides de camp' he said to me, in a
tone of profound sorrow, "What do they wish me to do with these men? Have I
food for them?—ships to convey them to Egypt or France? Why, in the devil's
name, have they served me thus?" After their arrival, and the explanations
which the General-in-Chief demanded and listened to with anger, Eugène and
Croisier received the most severe reprimand for their conduct. But the deed was
done. Four thousand men were there. It was necessary to decide upon their fate.
The two aides de camp observed that they had found themselves alone in the
midst of numerous enemies, and that he had directed them to restrain the
carnage. "Yes, doubtless," replied the General-in-Chief, with great warmth, "as
to women, children, and old men—all the peaceable inhabitants; but not with
respect to armed soldiers. It was your duty to die rather than bring these
unfortunate creatures to me. What do you want me to do with them?" These words
were pronounced in the most angry tone.  The prisoners were then ordered to sit
down, and were placed, without any order, in front of the tents, their hands
tied behind their backs. A sombre determination was depicted on their
countenances. We gave them a little biscuit and bread, squeezed out of the
already scanty supply for the army.  On the first day of their arrival a
council of war was held in the tent of the General-in-Chief, to determine what
course should be pursued with respect to them. The council deliberated a long
time without coming to any decision.  On the evening of the following day the
daily reports of the generals of division came in. They spoke of nothing but
the insufficiency of the rations, the complaints of the soldiers—of their
murmurs and discontent at seeing their bread given to enemies who had been
withdrawn from their vengeance, inasmuch as a decree of death, in conformity
with the laws of war, had been passed on Jaffa. All these reports were
alarming, and especially that of General Bon, in which no reserve was made. He
spoke of nothing less than the fear of a revolt, which would be justified by
the serious nature of the case.  The council assembled again. All the generals
of division were summoned to attend, and for several hours together they
discussed, under separate questions, what measures might be adopted, with the
most sincere desire to discover and execute one which would save the lives of
these unfortunate prisoners.
