Croisier, who was mentioned on our arrival at Damanhour and on the capture of
Jaffa, had in vain courted death since the commencement of the siege. Life had
become insupportable to him since the unfortunate affair at Jaffa. He as usual
accompanied his General to the trenches. Believing that the termination of the
siege, which was supposed to be near, would postpone indefinitely the death
which he sought, he mounted a battery. In this situation his tall figure
uselessly provoked all the enemy's shots. "Croisier, come down, I command you;
you have no business there," cried Bonaparte, in a loud and imperative tone.
Croisier remained without making any reply. A moment after a ball passed
through his right leg. Amputation was not considered indispensable. On the day
of our departure he was placed on a litter, which was borne by sixteen men
alternately, eight at a time. I received his farewell between Gaza and
El-Arish, where he died of tetanus. His modest tomb will not be often visited.
The siege of St. Jean d'Acre lasted sixty days. During that time eight assaults
and twelve sorties took place. In the assault of the 8th of May more than 200
men penetrated into the town. Victory was already shouted; but the breach
having been taken in reverse by the Turks, it was not approached without some
degree of hesitation, and the men who had entered were not supported. The
streets were barricaded. The cries, the howlings of the women, who ran through
the streets throwing, according to the custom of the country, dust in the air,
excited the male inhabitants to a desperate resistance, which rendered
unavailing this short occupation of the town, by a handful of men, who, finding
themselves left without assistance, retreated towards the breach. Many who
could not reach it perished in the town.  During this assault Duroc, who was in
the trench, was wounded in the right thigh by the splinter from a shell fired
against the fortifications. Fortunately this accident only carried away the
flesh from the bone, which remained untouched. He had a tent in common with
several other 'aides de camp'; but for his better accommodation I gave him
mine, and I scarcely ever quitted him. Entering his tent one day about noon, I
found him in a profound sleep. The excessive heat had compelled him to throw
off all covering, and part of his wound was exposed. I perceived a scorpion
which had crawled up the leg of the camp-bed and approached very near to the
wound. I was just in time to hurl it to the ground. The sudden motion of my
hand awoke Duroc.  We often bathed in the sea. Sometimes the English, perhaps
after taking a double allowance of grog, would fire at our heads, which
appeared above water. I am not aware that any accident was occasioned by their
cannonade; but as we were beyond reach of their guns, we paid scarcely any
attention to the firing. It was seen a subject of amusement to us.  Had our
attack on St. Jean d'Acre been less precipitate, and had the siege been
undertaken according to the rules of war, the place would not have held out
three days; one assault, like that of the 8th of May, would have been
sufficient. If, in the situation in which we were on the day when we first came
in sight of the ramparts of Acre; we had made a less inconsiderate estimate of
the strength of the place; if we had likewise taken into consideration the
active co-operation of the English and the Ottoman Porte, our absolute want of
artillery of sufficient calibre, our scarcity of gunpowder and the difficulty
of procuring food, we certainly should not have undertaken the siege; and that
would have been by far the wisest course.  Towards the end of the siege the
General-in-Chief received intelligence of some trifling insurrections in
northern Egypt. An angel had excited them, and the heavenly messenger, who had
condescended to assume a name, was called the Mahdi, or El Mohdy. This
religious extravagance, however, did not last long, and tranquillity was soon
restored. All that the fanatic Mahdi, who shrouded himself in mystery,
succeeded in doing was to attack our rear by some vagabonds, whose illusions
were dissipated by a few musket shots.
