We reached Tentoura on the 20th of May, when a most oppressive heat prevailed,
and produced general dejection. We had nothing to sleep on but the parched and
burning sand; on our right lay a hostile sea; our losses in wounded and sick
were already considerable since leaving Acre; and there was nothing consolatory
in the future. The truly afflicting condition in which the remains of an army
called triumphant were plunged, produced, as might well be expected, a
corresponding impression on the mind of the General-in-Chief. Scarcely had he
arrived at Tentoura when he ordered his tent to be pitched. He then called me,
and with a mind occupied by the calamities of our situation, dictated an order
that every one should march on foot; and that all the horses, mules, and camels
should be given up to the wounded, the sick, and infected who had been removed,
and who still showed signs of life. "Carry that to Berthier," said he; and the
order was instantly despatched. Scarcely had I returned to the tent when the
elder Vigogne, the General-in-Chief's groom, entered, and raising his hand to
his cap, said, "General, what horse do you reserve for yourself?" In the state
of excitement in which Bonaparte was this question irritated him so violently
that, raising his whip, he gave the man a severe blow on the head, saying in a
terrible voice, "Every-one must go on foot, you rascal—I the first—Do you not
know the order? Be off!" Every one in parting with his horse was now anxious to
avoid giving it to any unfortunate individual supposed to be suffering from
plague. Much pains were taken to ascertain the nature of the diseases of the
sick; and no difficulty was made in accommodating the wounded of amputated. For
my part I had an excellent horse; a mule, and two camels, all which I gave up
with the greatest pleasure; but I confess that I directed my servant to do all
he could to prevent an infected person from getting my horse. It was returned
to me in a very short time. The same thing happened to many others. The cause
may be easily conjectured.  The remains of our heavy artillery were lost in the
moving sands of Tentoura, from the want of horses, the small number that
remained being employed in more indispensable services. The soldiers seemed to
forget their own sufferings, plunged in grief at the loss of their bronze guns,
often the instruments of their triumphs, and which had made Europe tremble.  We
halted at Caesarea on the 22d of May, and we marched all the following night.
Towards daybreak a man, concealed in a bush upon the left of the road (the sea
was two paces from us on the right), fired a musket almost close to the head of
the General-in-Chief, who was sleeping on his horse. I was beside him. The wood
being searched, the Nablousian was taken without difficulty, and ordered to be
shot on the spot. Four guides pushed him towards the sea by thrusting their
carbines against his back; when close to the water's edge they drew the
triggers, but all the four muskets hung fire: a circumstance which was
accounted for by the great humidity of the night. The Nablousian threw himself
into the water, and, swimming with great agility and rapidity, gained a ridge
of rocks so far off that not a shot from the whole troop, which fired as it
passed, reached him. Bonaparte, who continued his march, desired me to wait for
Kléber, whose division formed the rear-guard, and to tell him not to forget the
Nablousian. He was, I believe, shot at last.  We returned to Jaffa on the 24th
of May, and stopped there during the 25th, 26th, 27th, and 28th. This town had
lately been the scene of a horrible transaction, dictated by necessity, and it
was again destined to witness the exercise of the same dire law. Here I have a
painful duty to perform—I will perform it. I will state what I know, what I
saw.  I have seen the following passage in a certain, work:—"Bonaparte, having
arrived at Jaffa, ordered three removals of the infected: one by sea to
Damietta, and also by land; the second to Gaza; and the third to El-Arish!" So,
many words, so many errors!
