The official report of what passed at Jaffa was drawn up by Berthier, under the
eye of Bonaparte. It has been published; but it may be remarked that not a word
about the infected, not a word of the visit to the hospital, or the touching of
the plague-patients with impunity, is there mentioned. In no official report is
anything said about the matter. Why this silence? Bonaparte was not the man to
conceal a fact which would have afforded him so excellent and so allowable a
text for talking about his fortune. If the infected were removed, why not
mention it? Why be silent on so important an event? But it would have been
necessary to confess that being obliged to have recourse to so painful a
measure was the unavoidable consequence of this unfortunate expedition. Very
disagreeable details must have been entered into; and it was thought more
advisable to be silent on the subject.  But what did Napoleon himself say on
the subject at St. Helena? His statement there was to the following effect:—"I
ordered a consultation as to what was best to be done. The report which was
made stated that there were seven or eight men (the question is not about the
number) so dangerously ill that they could not live beyond twenty-four hours,
and would besides infect the rest of the army with the plague. It was thought
it would be an act of charity to anticipate their death a few hours." Then
comes the fable of the 500 men of the rear guard, who, it is pretended, saw
them die! I make no doubt that the story of the poisoning was the invention of
Den——. He was a babbler, who understood a story badly, and repeated it worse. I
do not think it would have been a crime to have given opium to the infected. On
the contrary, it would have been obedience to the dictates of reason. Where is
the man who would not, in such a situation, have preferred a prompt death, to
being exposed to the lingering tortures inflicted by barbarians? If my child,
and I believe I love him as much as any father does his, had been in such a
state, my advice would have been the same; if I had been among the infected
myself, I should have demanded to be so treated.  Such was the reasoning at St.
Helena, and such was the view which he and every one else took of the case
twenty years ago at Jaffa.  Our little army arrived at Cairo on the 14th of
June, after a painful and harassing march of twenty-five days. The heats during
the passage of the desert between El-Arish and Belbeis exceeded thirty-three
degrees. On placing the bulb of the thermometer in the sand the mercury rose to
forty-five degrees. The deceitful mirage was even more vexatious than in the
plains of Bohahire'h. In spite of our experience an excessive thirst, added to
a perfect illusion, made us goad on our wearied horses towards lakes which
vanished at our approach, and left behind nothing but salt and arid sand. In
two days my cloak was completely covered with salt, left on it after the
evaporation of the moisture which held it in solution. Our horses, who ran
eagerly to the brackish springs of the desert, perished in numbers, after
travelling about a quarter of a league from the spot where they drank the
deleterious fluid.  Bonaparte preceded his entry into the capital of Egypt by
one of those lying bulletins which only imposed on fools. "I will bring with
me," said he, "many prisoners and flags. I have razed the palace of the Djezzar
and the ramparts of Acre—not a stone remains upon another. All the inhabitants
have left the city, by sea. Djezzar is severely wounded." I confess that I
experienced a painful sensation in writing, by his dictation, these official
words, everyone of which was an imposition. Excited by all I had just
witnessed, it was difficult for me to refrain from making the observation; but
his constant reply was, "My dear fellow, you are a simpleton: you do not
understand this business." And he observed, when signing the bulletin, that he
would yet fill the world with admiration, and inspire historians and poets.
