Next morning, just as we were on the point of setting sail, we saw, coming from
the port of Alexandria a boat, on board of which was M. Parseval Grandmaison.
This excellent man, who was beloved by all of us, was not included among the
persons whose return to France had been determined by the General-in-Chief. In
his anxiety to get off Bonaparte would not hear of taking him on board. It will
readily be conceived how urgent were the entreaties of Parseval; but he would
have sued in vain had not Gantheaume, Monge, Berthollet, and I interceded for
him. With some difficulty we overcame Bonaparte's resistance, and our colleague
of the Egyptian Institute got on board after the wind had filled our sails.  It
has been erroneously said that Admiral Gantheaume had full control of the
frigates, as if any one could command when Bonaparte was present. On the
contrary, Bonaparte declared to the admiral, in my hearing, that he would not
take the ordinary course and get into the open sea. "Keep close along the coast
of the Mediterranean," said he, "on the African side, until you get south of
Sardinia. I have here a handful of brave fellows and a few pieces of artillery;
if the English should appear I will run ashore, and with my party, make my way
by land to Oran, Tunis, or some other port, whence we may find an opportunity
of getting home." This was his irrevocable determination.  For twenty-one days
adverse winds, blowing from west or north-west, drove us continually on the
coast of Syria, or in the direction of Alexandria. At one time it was even
proposed that we should again put into the port; but Bonaparte declared he
would rather brave every danger than do so. During the day we tacked to a
certain distance northward, and in the evening we stood towards Africa, until
we came within sight of the coast. Finally after no less than twenty-one days
of impatience and disappointment, a favourable east wind carried us past that
point of Africa on which Carthage formerly stood, and we soon doubled Sardinia.
We kept very near the western coast of that island, where Bonaparte had
determined to land in case of our falling in with the English squadron. From
thence his plan was to reach Corsica, and there to await a favourable
opportunity of returning to France.  Everything had contributed to render our
voyage dull and monotonous; and, besides, we were not entirely without
uneasiness as to the steps which might be taken by the Directory, for it was
certain that the publication of the intercepted correspondence must have
occasioned many unpleasant disclosures. Bonaparte used often to walk on deck to
superintend the execution of his orders. The smallest sail that appeared in
view excited his alarm.  The fear of falling into the hands of the English
never forsook him. That was what he dreaded most of all, and yet, at a
subsequent period, he trusted to the generosity of his enemies.  However, in
spite of our well-founded alarm, there were some moments in which we sought to
amuse ourselves, or, to use a common expression, to kill time. Cards afforded
us a source of recreation, and even this frivolous amusement served to develop
the character of Bonaparte. In general he was not fond of cards; but if he did
play, vingt-et-un was his favourite game, because it is more rapid than many
others, and because, in short, it afforded him an opportunity of cheating. For
example, he would ask for a card; if it proved a bad one he would say nothing,
but lay it down on the table and wait till the dealer had drawn his. If the
dealer produced a good card, then Bonaparte would throw aside his hand, without
showing it, and give up his stake. If, on the contrary, the dealer's card made
him exceed twenty-one, Bonaparte also threw his cards aside without showing
them, and asked for the payment of his stake. He was much diverted by these
little tricks, especially when they were played off undetected; and I confess
that even then we were courtiers enough to humour him, and wink at his
cheating. I must, however, mention that he never appropriated to himself the
fruit of these little dishonesties, for at the end of the game he gave up all
his winnings, and they were equally divided. Gain, as may readily be supposed,
was not his object; but he always expected that fortune would grant him an ace
or a ten at the right moment with the same confidence with which he looked for
fine weather on the day of battle. If he were disappointed he wished nobody to
know it.
