The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground floor, and
one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three chambers on the first,
and an attic above. Behind the house was a garden, a quarter of an acre in
extent. The two women occupied the first floor; the Bishop was lodged below.
The first room, opening on the street, served him as dining-room, the second
was his bedroom, and the third his oratory. There was no exit possible from
this oratory, except by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom,
without passing through the dining-room. At the end of the suite, in the
oratory, there was a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases of
hospitality. The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whom business or
the requirements of their parishes brought to D—— The pharmacy of the hospital,
a small building which had been added to the house, and abutted on the garden,
had been transformed into a kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was
in the garden a stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital,
and in which the Bishop kept two cows. No matter what the quantity of milk they
gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick people in the
hospital. "I am paying my tithes," he said.  His bedroom was tolerably large,
and rather difficult to warm in bad weather. As wood is extremely dear at D——,
he hit upon the idea of having a compartment of boards constructed in the
cow-shed. Here he passed his evenings during seasons of severe cold: he called
it his winter salon.  In this winter salon, as in the dining-room, there was no
other furniture than a square table in white wood, and four straw-seated
chairs. In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with an antique
sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similar sideboard, properly
draped with white napery and imitation lace, the Bishop had constructed the
altar which decorated his oratory.  His wealthy penitents and the sainted women
of D—— had more than once assessed themselves to raise the money for a new
altar for Monseigneur's oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and
had given it to the poor. "The most beautiful of altars," he said, "is the soul
of an unhappy creature consoled and thanking God." In his oratory there were
two straw prie-Dieu, and there was an arm-chair, also in straw, in his bedroom.
When, by chance, he received seven or eight persons at one time, the prefect,
or the general, or the staff of the regiment in garrison, or several pupils
from the little seminary, the chairs had to be fetched from the winter salon in
the stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and the arm-chair from the bedroom:
in this way as many as eleven chairs could be collected for the visitors. A
room was dismantled for each new guest.  It sometimes happened that there were
twelve in the party; the Bishop then relieved the embarrassment of the
situation by standing in front of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling
in the garden if it was summer.  There was still another chair in the detached
alcove, but the straw was half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that
it was of service only when propped against the wall. Mademoiselle Baptistine
had also in her own room a very large easy-chair of wood, which had formerly
been gilded, and which was covered with flowered pekin; but they had been
obliged to hoist this bergere up to the first story through the window, as the
staircase was too narrow; it could not, therefore, be reckoned among the
possibilities in the way of furniture.  Mademoiselle Baptistine's ambition had
been to be able to purchase a set of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht
velvet, stamped with a rose pattern, and with mahogany in swan's neck style,
with a sofa. But this would have cost five hundred francs at least, and in view
of the fact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and ten sous
for this purpose in the course of five years, she had ended by renouncing the
idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal?
