I had no motive to induce me to visit either the Temple or La Force, but I
received at the time circumstantial details of what was passing in those
prisons, particularly in the former; I went, however, frequently to St.
Pelagie, where M. Carbonnet was confined. As soon as I knew that he was lodged
in that prison I set about getting an admission from Real, who smoothed all
difficulties. M. Carbonnet was detained two months in solitary confinement. He
was several times examined, but the interrogatories produced no result, and,
notwithstanding the desire to implicate him in consequence of the known
intimacy between him and Moreau, it was at last found impossible to put him on
trial with the other parties accused.  The Temple had more terrors than St.
Pelagie, but not for the prisoners who were committed to it, for none of those
illustrious victims of police machination displayed any weakness, with the
exception of Bouvet de Lozier, who, being sensible of his weakness, wished to
prevent its consequences by death. The public, however, kept their attention
riveted on the prison in which Moreau was confined. I have already mentioned
that Pichegru was conveyed thither on the night of the 22d of February; a
fortnight later Georges was arrested, and committed to the same prison.  Either
Real or Desmarets, and sometimes both together, repaired to the Temple to
examine the prisoners. In vain the police endeavoured to direct public odium
against the prisoners by placarding lists of their names through the whole of
Paris, even before they were arrested. In those lists they were styled
"brigands," and at the head of "the brigands," the name of General Moreau shone
conspicuously. An absurdity without a parallel. The effect produced was totally
opposite to that calculated on; for, as no person could connect the idea of a
brigand with that of a general who was the object of public esteem, it was
naturally concluded that those whose names were placarded along with his were
no more brigands than he.  Public opinion was decidedly in favour of Moreau,
and every one was indignant at seeing him described as a brigand. Far from
believing him guilty, he was regarded as a victim fastened on because his
reputation embarrassed Bonaparte; for Moreau had always been looked up to as
capable of opposing the accomplishment of the First Consul's ambitious views.
The whole crime of Moreau was his having numerous partisans among those who
still clung to the phantom of the Republic, and that crime was unpardonable in
the eyes of the First Consul, who for two years had ruled the destinies of
France as sovereign master. What means were not employed to mislead the opinion
of the public respecting Moreau? The police published pamphlets of all sorts,
and the Comte de Montgaillard was brought from Lyons to draw up a libel
implicating him with Pichegru and the exiled Princes. But nothing that was done
produced the effect proposed.  The weak character of Moreau is known. In fact,
he allowed himself to be circumvented by a few intriguers, who endeavoured to
derive advantage from the influence of his name. But he was so decidedly
opposed to the reestablishment of the ancient system that he replied to one of
the agents who addressed' him, "I cannot put myself at the head of any movement
for the Bourbons, and such an attempt would not succeed. If Pichegru act on
another principle—and even in that case I have told him that the Consuls and
the Governor of Paris must disappear—I believe that I have a party strong
enough in the Senate to obtain possession of authority, and I will immediately
make use of it to protect his friends; public opinion will then dictate what
may be fit to be done, but I will promise nothing in writing." Admitting these
words attributed to Moreau to be true, they prove that he was dissatisfied with
the Consular Government, and that he wished a change; but there is a great
difference between a conditional wish and a conspiracy.
