The commander of the principal guard of the Temple was General Savory, and he
had reinforced that guard by his select gendarmerie. The prisoners did not dare
to communicate one with another for fear of mutual injury, but all evinced a
courage which created no little alarm as to the consequences of the trial.
Neither offers nor threats produced any confessions in the course of the
interrogatories. Pichegru, in particular, displayed an extraordinary firmness,
and Real one day, on leaving the chamber where he had been examining him, said
aloud in the presence of several persons, "What a man that Pichegru is!" Forty
days elapsed after the arrest of General Pichegru when, on the morning of the
6th of April, he was found dead in the chamber he occupied in the Temple.
Pichegru had undergone ten examinations; but he had made no confessions, and no
person was committed by his replies.  All his declarations, however, gave
reason to believe that he would speak out, and that too in a lofty and
energetic manner during the progress of the trial. "When I am before my
judges," said he, "my language shall be conformable to truth and the interests
of my country." What would that language have been? Without doubt there was no
wish that it should be heard. Pichegru would have kept his promise, for he was
distinguished for his firmness of character above everything, even above his
qualities as a soldier; differing in this respect from Moreau, who allowed
himself to be guided by his wife and mother-in-law, both of whom displayed
ridiculous pretensions in their visits to Madame Bonaparte.  The day on which
Real spoke before several persons of Pichegru in the way I have related was the
day of his last examination. I afterwards learned, from a source on which I can
rely, that during his examination Pichegru, though careful to say nothing which
could affect the other prisoners, showed no disposition to be tender of him who
had sought and resolved his death, but evinced a firm resolution to unveil
before the public the odious machinery of the plot into which the police had
drawn him. He also declared that he and his companions had no longer any object
but to consider of the means of leaving Paris, with the view of escaping from
the snares laid for them when their arrest took place. He declared that they
had all of them given up the idea of overturning the power of Bonaparte, a
scheme into which they had been enticed by shameful intrigues. I am convinced
the dread excited by his manifestation of a resolution to speak out with the
most rigid candour hastened the death of Pichegru. M. Real, who is still
living, knows better than any one else what were Pichegru's declarations, as he
interrogated him. I know not whether that gentleman will think fit, either at
the present or some future period, to raise the veil of mystery which hangs
over these events, but of this I am sure, he will be unable to deny anything I
advance. There is evidence almost amounting to demonstration that Pichegru was
strangled in prison, and consequently all idea of suicide must be rejected as
inadmissible. Have I positive and substantive proof of what I assert? I have
not; but the concurrence of facts and the weight of probabilities do not leave
me in possession of the doubts I should wish to entertain on that tragic event.
Besides, there exists a certain popular instinct, which is rarely at fault, and
it must be in the recollection of many, not only that the general opinion
favoured the notion of Pichegru's assassination, but that the pains taken to
give that opinion another direction, by the affected exhibition of the body,
only served to strengthen it. He who spontaneously says, I have not committed
such or such a crime, at least admits there is room for suspecting his guilt.
The truth is, the tide of opinion never set in with such force against
Bonaparte as during the trial of Moreau; nor was the popular sentiment in error
on the subject of the death of Pichegru, who was clearly strangled in the
Temple by secret agents. The authors, the actors, and the witnesses of the
horrible prison scenes of the period are the only persons capable of removing
the doubts which still hang over the death of Pichegru; but I must nevertheless
contend that the preceding circumstances, the general belief at the time, and
even probability, are in contradiction with any idea of suicide on the part of
Pichegru. His death was considered necessary, and this necessity was its real
cause.
