Georges was arrested about seven o'clock, on the evening of the 9th of March,
with another conspirator, whose name, I think, was Leridan. Georges was stopped
in a cabriolet on the Place de l'Odeon, whither he had no doubt been directed
by the police agent, who was constantly about him. In not seizing him at his
lodgings, the object, probably, was to give more publicity to his arrest, and
to produce an effect upon the minds of the multitude. This calculation cost the
life of one man, and had well-nigh sacrificed the lives of two, for Georges,
who constantly carried arms about him, first shot dead the police officer who
seized the horse's reins, and wounded another who advanced to arrest him is the
cabriolet. Besides his pistols there was found upon him a poniard of English
manufacture.  Georges lodged with a woman named Lemoine, who kept a fruiterer's
shop in the Rue de la Montagne St. Genevieve, and on the evening of the 9th of
March he had just left his lodging to go, it was said, to a perfumer's named
Caron. It is difficult to suppose that the circumstance of the police being on
the spot was the mere effect of chance. The fruiterer's daughter was putting
into the cabriolet a parcel belonging to Georges at the moment of his arrest.
Georges, seeing the officers advance to seize him, desired the girl to get out
of the way, fearing lest he should shoot her when he fired on the officers. She
ran into a neighbouring house, taking the parcel along with her. The police, it
may readily be supposed, were soon after her. The master of the house in which
she had taken refuge, curious to know what the parcel contained, had opened it,
and discovered, among other things, a bag containing 1000 Dutch sovereigns,
from which he acknowledged he had abstracted a considerable sum. He and his
wife, as well as the fruiterer's daughter, were all arrested; as to Georges, he
was taken that same evening to the Temple, where he remained until his removal
to the Conciergerie when the trial commenced.  During the whole of the legal
proceedings Georges and the other important prisoners were kept in solitary
confinement. Immediately on Pichegru's death the prisoners were informed of the
circumstance. As they were all acquainted with the general, and none believed
the fact of his reported suicide, it may easily be conceived what consternation
and horror the tragical event excited among them. I learned, and I was sorry to
hear of it, that Louis Bonaparte, who was an excellent man, and, beyond all
comparison, the best of the family, had the cruel curiosity to see Georges in
his prison a few days after the death of Pichegru, and when the sensation of
horror excited by that event in the interior of the Temple was at its height,
Louis repaired to the prison, accompanied by a brilliant escort of
staff-officers, and General Savary introduced him to the prisoners. When Louis
arrived, Georges was lying on his bed with his hands strongly bound by
manacles. Lauriston, who accompanied Louis, related to me some of the
particulars of this visit, which, in spite of his sincere devotedness to the
first Consul, he assured me had been very painful to him.  After the arrest of
Georges there were still some individuals marked out as accomplices in the
conspiracy who had found means to elude the search of the police. The persons
last arrested were, I think, Villeneuve, one of the principal confidants of
Georges, Burban Malabre, who went by the name of Barco, and Charles d'Hozier.
They were not taken till five days after the arrest of the Duc d'Enghien. The
famous Commissioner Comminges, accompanied by an inspector and a detachment of
gendarmes d'Elite, found Villeneuve and Burban Malabre in the house of a man
named Dubuisson, in the Rue Jean Robert.  This Dubuisson and his wife had
sheltered some of the principal persons proscribed by the police. The Messieurs
de Polignac and M. de Riviere had lodged with them. When the police came to
arrest Villeneuve and Burban Malabre the people with whom they lodged declared
that they had gone away in the morning. The officers, however, searched the
house, and discovered a secret door within a closet. They called, and receiving
no answer, the gendarmerie had recourse to one of those expedients which were,
unfortunately, too familiar to them. They fired a pistol through the door.
Villeneuve, who went by the name of Joyau, was wounded in the arm, which
obliged him and his companion to come from the place of their concealment, and
they were then made prisoners.
