Then reverting to Moreau, the Emperor talked a great deal respecting that
general. "Moreau," he said, "possesses many good qualities; his bravery is
undoubted; but he has more courage than energy; he is indolent and effeminate.
When with the army he lived like a pasha; he smoked, was almost constantly in
bed, and gave himself up to the pleasures of the table. His dispositions are
naturally good; but he is too indolent for study; he does not read, and since
he has been tied to his wife's apronstrings is fit for nothing. He sees only
with the eyes of his wife and her mother, who have had a hand in all these late
plots; and then, Bourrienne, is it not very strange that it was by my advice
that he entered into this union? I was told that Mademoiselle Hulot was a
creole, and I believed that he would find in her a second Josephine; how
greatly was I mistaken! It is these women who have estranged us from each
other, and I regret that he should have acted so unworthily. You must remember
my observing to you more than two years ago that Moreau would one day run his
head against the gate of the Tuileries; that he has done so was no fault of
mine, for you know how much I did to secure his attachment. You cannot have
forgotten the reception I gave him at Malmaison. On the 18th Brumaire I
conferred on him the charge of the Luxembourg, and in that situation he fully
justified my choice. But since that period he has behaved towards me with the
utmost ingratitude—entered into all the silly cabala against me, blamed all my
measures, and turned into ridicule the Legion of Honour. Have not some of the
intriguers put it into his head that I regard him with jealousy? You must be
aware of that. You must also know as well as I how anxious the members of the
Directory were to exalt the reputation of Moreau. Alarmed at my success in
Italy, they wished to have in the armies a general to serve as a counterpoise
to my renown. I have ascended the throne and he is the inmate of a prison! You
are aware of the incessant clamouring raised against me by the whole family, at
which I confess I was very much displeased; coming from those whom I had
treated so well! Had he attached himself to me, I would doubtless have
conferred on him the title of First Marshal of the Empire; but what could I do?
He constantly depreciated my campaigns and my government. From discontent to
revolt there is frequently only one step, especially when a man of a weak
character becomes the tool of popular clubs; and therefore when I was first
informed that Moreau was implicated in the conspiracy of Georges I believed him
to be guilty, but hesitated to issue an order for his arrest till I had taken
the opinion of my Council. The members having assembled, I ordered the
different documents to be laid before them, with an injunction to examine them
with the utmost care, since they related to an affair of importance, and I
urged them candidly to inform me whether, in their opinion, any of the charges
against Moreau were sufficiently strong to endanger his life. The fools! their
reply was in the affirmative; I believe they were even unanimous! Then I had no
alternative but to suffer the proceedings to take their course. It is
unnecessary to affirm to you, Bourrienne, that Moreau never should have
perished on a scaffold! Most assuredly I would have pardoned him; but with the
sentence of death hanging over his head he could no longer have proved
dangerous; and his name would have ceased to be a rallying-point for
disaffected Republicans or imbecile Royalists. Had the Council expressed any
doubts respecting his guilt I would have intimated to him that the suspicions
against him were so strong as to render any further connection between us
impossible; and that the best course he could pursue would be to leave France
for three years, under the pretext of visiting some of the places rendered
celebrated during the late wars; but that if he preferred a diplomatic mission
I would make a suitable provision for his expenses; and the great innovator,
Time, might effect great changes during the period of his absence. But my
foolish Council affirmed to me that his guilt, as a principal, being evident,
it was absolutely necessary to bring him to trial; and now his sentence is only
that of a pickpocket. What think you I ought to do? Detain him? He might still
prove a rallying-point. No. Let him sell his property and quit? Can I confine
him in the Temple? It is full enough without him. Still, if this had been the
only great error they had led me to commit—"
