"He is very much mistaken," resumed the Emperor, "if he conceives I bore any
ill-will towards him. After his arrest I sent Lauriston to the Temple, whom I
chose because he was of an amiable and conciliating disposition; I charged him
to tell Moreau to confess he had only seen Pichegru, and I would cause the
proceedings against him to be suspended. Instead of receiving this act of
generosity as he ought to have done, he replied to it with great haughtiness,
so much was he elated that Pichegru had not been arrested; he afterwards,
however, lowered his tone. He wrote to me a letter of excuse respecting his
anterior conduct, which I caused to be produced on the trial. He was the author
of his own ruin; besides, it would have required men of a different stamp from
Moreau to conspire against me. Amoung, the conspirators, for example, was an
individual whose fate I regret; this Georges in my hands might have achieved
great things. I can duly appreciate the firmness of character he displayed, and
to which I could have given a proper direction. I caused Real to intimate to
him that, if he would attach himself to me, not only should he be pardoned, but
that I would give him the command of a regiment. Perhaps I might even have made
him my aide de camp. Complaints would have been made, but, parbleu, I should
not have cared. Georges refused all my offers; he was as inflexible as iron.
What could I do? he underwent his fate, for he was a dangerous man;
circumstances rendered his death a matter of necessity. Examples of severity
were called for, when England was pouring into France the whole offscouring of
the emigration; but patience, patience! I have a long arm, and shall be able to
reach them, when necessary. Moreau regarded Georges merely as a ruffian—I
viewed him in a different light. You may remember the conversation I had with
him at the Tuileries—you and Rapp were in an adjoining cabinet. I tried in vain
to influence him—some of his associates were affected at the mention of country
and of glory; he alone stood cold and unmoved. I addressed myself to his
feelings, but in vain; he was insensible to everything I said. At that period
Georges appeared to me little ambitious of power; his whole wishes seemed to
centre in commanding the Vendeans. It was not till I had exhausted every means
of conciliation that I assumed the tone and language of the first magistrate. I
dismissed him with a strong injunction to live retired—to be peaceable and
obedient—not to misinterpret the motives of my conduct towards himself—nor
attribute to weakness what was merely the result of moderation and strength.
'Rest assured,' I added, 'and repeat to your associates, that while I hold the
reins of authority there will be neither chance nor salvation for those who
dare to conspire against me: How he conformed to this injunction the event has
shown. Real told me that when Moreau and Georges found themselves in the
presence of Pichegru they could not come to any understanding, because Georges
would not act against the Bourbons. Well, he had a plan, but Moreau had none;
he merely wished for my overthrow, without having formed any ulterior views
whatever. This showed that he was destitute of even common sense. Apropos,
Bourrienne, have you seen Corvisart?"—"Yes, Sire."—"Well!" "He delivered to me
the message with which you entrusted him."—"And Desmaisons!—I wager that you
have not spoken to him in conformity to my wishes."—"Sire, the estimation in
which I hold Desmaisons deterred me from a course so injurious to him; for in
what other light could he have considered what I should have said to him? I
have never visited at his house since the commencement of the trial."—"Well!
well! Be prudent and discreet, I shall not forget you." He then waved a very
gracious salute with his hand, and withdrew into his cabinet.  The Emperor had
detained me more than an hour. On leaving the audience-chamber I passed through
the outer salon, where a number of individuals were waiting; and I perceived
that an observance of etiquette was fast gaining ground, though the Emperor had
not yet adopted the admirable institution of Court Chamberlains.
