I addressed several memorials to him on this subject, stating that I had
replaced the worn-out furniture with new and superior articles; but this he
wholly disregarded, compelling me to give up everything, even to the greatest
trifle. It may be right to say that on his return the Emperor found his table
covered with information respecting my conduct in Paris, though I had not held
the smallest communication with any one in the capital, nor once entered it
during his absence.  After my departure for Hamburg, Bonaparte took possession
of my stables and coach-house, which he filled with horses. Even the very
avenues and walks were converted into stabling. A handsome house at the
entrance to the park was also appropriated to similar purposes; in fact, he
spared nothing. Everything was done in the true military style; I neither had
previous intimation of the proceedings nor received any remuneration for my
loss. The Emperor seemed to regard the property as his own; but though he all
but ordered me to make the purchase, he did not furnish the money that was paid
for it. In this way it was occupied for more than four years.  The recollection
of those arbitrary and vexatious proceedings on the part of Bonaparte has led
me farther than I intended. I shall therefore return to the imperial residence
of St. Cloud. On leaving the audience-chamber, as already stated, I repaired to
the apartments of the Empress, who, knowing that I was in the Palace, had
intimated her wishes for my attendance. No command could have been more
agreeable to me, for every one was certain of a gracious reception from
Josephine. I do not recollect which of the ladies in waiting was in attendance
when my name was announced; but she immediately retired, and left me alone with
Josephine. Her recent elevation had not changed the usual amenity of her
disposition. After some conversation respecting the change in her situation, I
gave her an account of what had passed between the Emperor and myself.  I
faithfully related all that he had said of Moreau, observing that at one moment
I imagined he was about to speak of the Duc d'Enghien, when he suddenly
reverted to what he had been saying, and never made the slightest allusion to
the subject.  Madame Bonaparte replied to me, "Napoleon has spoken the truth
respecting Moreau. He was grossly deceived by those who believed they could
best pay their court to him by calumniating that general. His silence on the
subject of the Duc d'Enghien does not surprise me; he says as little respecting
it as possible, and always in a vague manner, and with manifest repugnance.
When you see Bonaparte again be silent on the subject, and should chance bring
it forward, avoid every expression in the smallest degree indicative of
reproach; he would not suffer it; you would ruin yourself for ever in his
estimation, and the evil is, alas! without remedy. When you came to Malmaison I
told you that I had vainly endeavoured to turn him from his fatal purpose, and
how he had treated me. Since then he has experienced but little internal
satisfaction; it is only in the presence of his courtiers that he affects a
calm and tranquil deportment; but I perceive his sufferings are the greater
from thus endeavouring to conceal them. By the by, I forgot to mention that he
knew of the visit you paid me on the day after the catastrophe. I dreaded that
your enemies, the greater number of whom are also mine, might have
misrepresented that interview; but, fortunately, he paid little attention to
it. He merely said, 'So you have seen Bourrienne? Does he sulk at me?
Nevertheless I must do something for him.' He has again spoken in the same
strain, and repeated nearly the same expressions three days ago; and since he
has commanded your presence to-day, I have not a doubt but he has something in
view for your advantage."—"May I presume to inquire what it is?"—"I do not yet
know; but I would recommend to you, in the meantime, to be more strictly on
your guard than ever; he is so suspicious, and so well informed of all that is
done or said respecting himself. I have suffered so much since I last saw you;
never can I forget the unkind manner in which he rejected my entreaties! For
several days I laboured under a depression of spirits which greatly irritated
him, because he clearly saw whence it proceeded. I am not dazzled by the title
of Empress; I dread some evil will result from this step to him, to my
children, and to myself. The miscreants ought to be satisfied; see to what they
have driven us! This death embitters every moment of my life. I need not say to
you, Bourrienne, that I speak this in confidence."—"You cannot doubt my
prudence."—"No, certainly not, Bourrienne. I do not doubt it. My confidence in
you is unbounded. Rest assured that I shall never forget what you have done for
me, under various circumstances, and the devotedness you evinced to me on your
return from Egypt.—Adieu, my friend. Let me see you soon again."
