Then were they all much vexed, and my lady especially, so that she could not
refrain from weeping tears in great abundance at the loss of this trinket. They
all sorrowfully considered what was to be done. One said that it must be in the
chamber, and another said that they had searched everywhere, and that it was
impossible it should be there or they would have found it, as it was easily
seen.  The miller asked the lady if she had it when she entered the bath; and
she replied, yes.  "If it be so, certainly, madam, considering the diligence
you have made in searching for it, and without finding it, the affair is very
strange. Nevertheless, it seems to me that if there is any man who could give
advice how it should be found, I am he, and because I would not that my secret
should be discovered and known to many people, it would be expedient that I
should speak to you alone." "That is easily managed," said the lady. So her
attendants left, but, as they were leaving, Dames Jehanne, Isabeau, and
Katherine said, "Ah, miller, you will be a clever man if you bring back this
diamond." "I don't say that I am over-clever," replied the miller, "but I
venture to declare that if it is possible to find it I am the man to do so."
When he saw that he was alone with the lady, he told her that he believed
seriously, that as she had the diamond when she entered the bath, that it must
have fallen from her finger and entered her body, seeing that there was no one
who could have stolen it.  And that he might hasten to find it, he made the
lady-get upon her bed, which she would have willingly refused if she could have
done otherwise.  After he had uncovered her, he pretended to look here and
there, and said, "Certainly, madam, the diamond has entered your body." "Do you
say, miller, that you have seen it?" "Truly, yes." "Alas!" said she, "and how
can it be got out?" "Very easily, madam. I doubt not to succeed if it please
you." "May God help you! There is nothing that I would not do to get it again,"
said the lady, "or to advance you, good miller." The miller placed the lady on
the bed, much in the same position as the lord had placed his wife when he
fastened her front-piece, and with a like tool was the search for the diamond
made.  Whilst resting after the first and second search that the miller made
for the diamond, the lady asked him if he had not felt it, and he said, yes, at
which she was very joyful, and begged that he would seek until he had found it.
To cut matters short, the good miller did so well that he restored to the lady
her beautiful diamond, which caused great joy throughout the house, and never
did miller receive so much honour and advancement as the lady and her maids
bestowed upon him.  The good miller, who was high in the good graces of the
lady after the much-desired conclusion of his great enterprise, left the house
and went home, without boasting to his wife of his recent adventure, though he
was more joyful over it than though he had gained the whole world.  A short
time after, thank God, the knight returned to his castle, and was kindly
received and humbly welcomed by the lady, who whilst they were enjoying
themselves in bed, told him of the most wonderful adventure of the diamond, and
how it was fished out of her body by the miller; and, to cut matters short,
related the process, fashion, and manner employed by the said miller in his
search for the diamond, which hardly gave her husband much joy, but he
reflected that the miller had paid him back in his own coin.
