When the king was lately in the city of Tours, a Scottish gentleman, an archer
of his bodyguard, was greatly enamoured of a beautiful and gentle damsel
married to a mercer; and when he could find time and place, related to her his
sad case, but received no favourable reply,—at which he was neither content nor
joyous. Nevertheless, as he was much in love, he relaxed not the pursuit, but
besought her so eagerly, that the damsel, wishing to drive him away for good
and all, told him that she would inform her husband of the dishonourable and
damnable proposals made to her,—which at length she did.  The husband,—a good
and wise man, honourable and valiant, as you will see presently,—was very angry
to think that the Scot would dishonour him and his fair wife. And that he might
avenge himself without trouble, he commanded his wife that if the Scot should
accost her again, she should appoint a meeting on a certain day, and, if he
were so foolish as to come, he would buy his pleasure dearly.  The good wife,
to obey her husband's will, did as she was told. The poor amorous Scot, who
spent his time in passing the house, soon saw the fair mercer, and when he had
humbly saluted her, he besought her love so earnestly, and desired that she
would listen to his final piteous prayer, and if she would, never should woman
be more loyally served and obeyed if she would but grant his most humble and
reasonable request.  The fair mercer, remembering the lesson that her husband
had given her, finding the opportunity propitious, after many subterfuges and
excuses, told the Scot that he could come to her chamber on the following
evening, where he could talk to her more secretly, and she would give him what
he desired.  You may guess that she was greatly thanked, and her words listened
to with pleasure and obeyed by her lover, who left his lady feeling more joyous
than ever he had in his life.  When the husband returned home, he was told of
all the words and deeds of the Scot, and how he was to come on the morrow to
the lady's chamber.  "Let him come," said the husband. "Should he undertake
such a mad business I will make him, before he leaves, see and confess the evil
he has done, as an example to other daring and mad fools like him." The evening
of the next day drew near,—much to the joy of the amorous Scot, who wished to
see and enjoy the person of his lady;—and much also to the joy of the good
mercer who was desiring a great vengeance to be taken on the person of the Scot
who wished to replace him in the marriage bed; but not much to the taste of his
fair wife, who expected that her obedience to her husband would lead to a
serious fight.  All prepared themselves; the mercer put on a big, old, heavy
suit of armour, donned his helmet and gauntlets, and armed himself with a
battle-axe. Like a true champion, he took up his post early, and as he had no
tent in which to await his enemy, placed himself behind a curtain by the side
of the bed, where he was so well-hidden that he could not be perceived.  The
lover, sick with desire, knowing the longed-for hour was now at hand, set out
for the house of the mercer, but he did not forget to take his big, good,
strong two-handed sword; and when he was within the house, the lady went up to
her chamber without showing any fear, and he followed her quietly. And when he
came within the room, he asked the lady if she were alone? To which she replied
casually, and with some confusion, that she was.  "Tell me the truth," said the
Scot. "Is not your husband here?" "No," said she.  "Well! let him come! By
Saint Aignan, if he should come, I would split his skull to the teeth. By God!
if there were three of them I should not fear them. I should soon master them!"
After these wicked words, he drew his big, good sword, and brandished it three
or four times; then laid it on the bed by his side.
