A goldsmith of Paris, once, in order to complete some of his wares in time for
the fair of Lendit, laid in a large stock of willow charcoal. It happened one
day amongst others, that the waggoner who delivered this charcoal, knowing that
the goldsmith was in great haste, brought two waggons more than he had on any
previous day, but hardly had he entered Paris with the last load than the city
gates were shut on his heels. Nevertheless, he was well received by the
goldsmith, and after the charcoal was unloaded, and the horses stabled, they
all supped at their leisure, and made great cheer, and drank heavily. Just as
the meal finished the clock struck midnight, which astonished them greatly, so
quickly had the time passed at supper.  Each one thanked God, and being
heavy-eyed, only asked to go to bed, but as it was so late, the goldsmith
detained the waggoner, fearing that he might meet the watch, who would have put
him into the Châtelet had they found him at that hour of the night.  At that
time the goldsmith had many persons working for him, and he was obliged to make
the waggoner lie with him and his wife, and, not being of a suspicions nature,
he made his wife lie between him and the waggoner.  He had great trouble to
arrange this, for the good waggoner refused his hospitality, and would rather
have slept in the barn or stable, but he was obliged to obey the goldsmith. And
after he had undressed, he got into bed, in which already were the goldsmith
and his wife, as I have already said.  The wife feeling the waggoner approach
her, moved nearer her husband, both on account of the cold and the smallness of
the bed, and, instead of a pillow, placed her head upon her husband's breast,
whilst her backside rested on the waggoner's knees.  Our goldsmith soon went to
sleep, and his wife pretended to also, and the waggoner, being tired from his
work, did the same. But as the stallion grows hot as soon as he approaches the
mare, so did this stallion lift up his head on feeling so near to him the
aforesaid woman.  It was not within the power of the waggoner to refrain from
attacking her closely; and this lasted for some time without the woman waking,
or at least pretending to wake. Nor would the husband have awaked, had it not
been that the head of his wife reclined on his breast, and owing to the assault
of this stallion, gave him such a bump that he quickly woke.  He thought at
first that his wife was dreaming, but as her dream continued, and he heard the
waggoner moving about and breathing hard, he gently put down his hand, and
found what ravage the stallion of the waggoner was making in his warren;—at
which, as he loved his wife, he was not well content. He soon made the waggoner
with draw, and said to him, "What are you doing, you wicked rascal? You must be
mad to attack my wife in that way. Don't do it again! Morbleu! I declare to you
that if she had woke just now when your machine was pushing her, I don't know
what she would have done; but I feel certain, as I know her well, that she
would have scratched your face, and torn out your eyes with her nails. You
don't know what she will do when she loses her temper, and there is nothing in
the world which puts her out more. Take it away, I beg, for your own sake." The
waggoner, in a few words, declared that it was unintentional, and, as day was
breaking, he rose and took his leave and went away with his cart.  You may
fancy that the good woman on whom the waggoner made this attempt was displeased
in another way than her husband fancied; and afterwards it was said that the
waggoner met her in the proper way: but I would not believe it or credit the
report.
