In the city of Brussels, where a good many adventures have happened in our
time, there lived not long ago a young man of Picardy, who served his master
well and faithfully for a long period. And amongst other services which he did
the said master was this; that by his civil speech, bearing, and courtesy he so
gained the graces of his master's daughter, that he lay with her, and owing to
his meritorious actions she became pregnant.  The youth, knowing the lady was
in that condition, was not such a fool as to wait until his master should
perceive and know it. So he quickly asked leave to absent himself for a few
days,—albeit he had no intention to return—pretending that he must go to
Picardy to see his father and mother, and some others of his relations.  Then
he took farewell of his master and mistress, and had a most piteous
leave-taking with the daughter; to whom he promised quickly to return,—which he
did not, and for good cause.  When he was in Picardy, at the house of his
father, his master's daughter grew so big with child that her sad condition
could no longer be concealed; amongst others, her worthy mother, who was
experienced in such matters, was the first to notice it. She took her daughter
on one side, and asked her how she came to be in that condition, and who was
the cause of it. The girl had to be much pressed and scolded before she would
say anything, but at last was forced to confess her sad condition, and own that
it was the Picardian, who, a short while before, had been servant to her
father, who had seduced her, and left her in that pitiful case.  Her mother was
furious, and abused her till she could say no more, which the poor girl bore so
patiently and without saying a word, that it was enough to excuse her for
letting herself be put in the family-way by the Picardian.  But alas! her
patient endurance had no effect upon her mother, who said; "Go away! go away!
disgraceful hussy! and do your best to find the man who made you pregnant, and
tell him to undo that which he has done! Never come back to me till he has
undone the wrong he has done you." The poor girl, who was in the condition you
have heard, was crushed and overcome by the wrath of her cruel mother, and set
out in search of the young man who had ruined her; and you may well imagine,
had to endure much trouble and pain before she could hear any news of him.  But
at last, as God so willed it, after much wandering about through Picardy, she
came, one Sunday, to a large village in the county of Artois, and she came most
opportunely, for on that day her friend, the Picardian who had deceived her,
was to be married, at which she was very joyful. And she cared so little about
obeying her mother, that, big as she was, she pressed amongst the crowd, and
when she saw her lover, she saluted him. He, when he saw her, blushed, and
returned her salutation, and said to her; "You are very welcome! What brings
you here at this time, my dear?" "My mother," she replied, "sent me to you, and
God knows that you have caused me much upbraiding. She charged and commanded me
that I should tell you that you must undo that which you have done, or, if you
do not, I am never to go back to her." The other, when he heard this, to get
rid of her as soon as he could, spoke as follows.  "My dear, I will willingly
do that which you ask and your mother requires me to do, for it is very
reasonable, but at this moment I cannot be seen talking to you. I beg of you to
have patience for to-day, and to-morrow I will attend to your request." With
that she was content, and then he caused her to be taken and put in a fair
chamber, and commanded that she should be well-treated, as she deserved to be,
after the great trouble and difficulty she had had in seeking him out.  Now you
must know that the bride had kept her eyes open, and when she saw her husband
talking to a woman big with child, she had misgivings, and was by no means
satisfied, but much troubled and vexed in mind.
