They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied only by a
child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruited about the
country-side, and caused great consternation.  He would take neither his sister
nor Madame Magloire. He traversed the mountain on mule-back, encountered no
one, and arrived safe and sound at the residence of his "good friends," the
shepherds. He remained there for a fortnight, preaching, administering the
sacrament, teaching, exhorting. When the time of his departure approached, he
resolved to chant a Te Deum pontifically. He mentioned it to the cure. But what
was to be done? There were no episcopal ornaments. They could only place at his
disposal a wretched village sacristy, with a few ancient chasubles of
threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.  "Bah!" said the Bishop. "Let us
announce our Te Deum from the pulpit, nevertheless, Monsieur le Curé. Things
will arrange themselves." They instituted a search in the churches of the
neighborhood. All the magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not
have sufficed to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.  While they were
thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought and deposited in the presbytery for
the Bishop, by two unknown horsemen, who departed on the instant. The chest was
opened; it contained a cope of cloth of gold, a mitre ornamented with diamonds,
an archbishop's cross, a magnificent crosier,—all the pontifical vestments
which had been stolen a month previously from the treasury of Notre Dame
d'Embrun. In the chest was a paper, on which these words were written, "From
Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu." "Did not I say that things would come right
of themselves?" said the Bishop. Then he added, with a smile, "To him who
contents himself with the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an
archbishop." "Monseigneur," murmured the cure, throwing back his head with a
smile. "God—or the Devil." The Bishop looked steadily at the cure, and repeated
with authority, "God!" When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to
stare at him as at a curiosity, all along the road. At the priest's house in
Chastelar he rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire, who were
waiting for him, and he said to his sister: "Well! was I in the right? The poor
priest went to his poor mountaineers with empty hands, and he returns from them
with his hands full. I set out bearing only my faith in God; I have brought
back the treasure of a cathedral." That evening, before he went to bed, he said
again: "Let us never fear robbers nor murderers. Those are dangers from
without, petty dangers. Let us fear ourselves. Prejudices are the real robbers;
vices are the real murderers. The great dangers lie within ourselves. What
matters it what threatens our head or our purse! Let us think only of that
which threatens our soul." Then, turning to his sister: "Sister, never a
precaution on the part of the priest, against his fellow-man. That which his
fellow does, God permits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think
that a danger is approaching us. Let us pray, not for ourselves, but that our
brother may not fall into sin on our account." However, such incidents were
rare in his life. We relate those of which we know; but generally he passed his
life in doing the same things at the same moment. One month of his year
resembled one hour of his day.
