My lord, on account of the great love he bore his friend, would hide nothing
from him, and told him how he had that night agreed to sleep with the
tire-woman; and that he might do his friend pleasure, when he had been with her
a certain time, he would, he said, rise gently, and go away, and let the
visitor do the rest.  The visitor thanked his host, and God knows that the hour
seemed long in coming. At last the host took leave of his guest, and went to
his room, as was his custom, to undress.  Now you must know that whilst the
knights were talking, my lady went to the bed in which my lord expected to find
the tiring-maid, and there she awaited whatever God might be pleased to send
her.  My lord was a long time undressing, to give time to his wife to go to
sleep. He then dismissed his valet, and in his long dressing-gown went to where
his lady awaited him,—he thinking to find some-one else,—and silently undressed
and got into bed.  And as the candle was put out, and the lady uttered no word,
he believed he was with the woman. Hardly had he got into bed before he began
to perform his duty, and so well did he acquit himself, that three, even four,
times did not content him; whereat his wife felt great pleasure, and thinking
that that was all, fell asleep.  My lord, now much lighter than when he came,
seeing that the lady slept, and remembering his promise, rose quietly and went
to his friend, who was awaiting orders to go into action, and told him to take
his place, but that he must not speak a word, and must come away when he had
done all that he wished.  The other, as wide-awake as a rat, and straining at
the leash like a greyhound,—went, and lay down by the lady without her knowing
of it. And though he felt assured that my lord had already worked well, and he
was in haste, he did better, at which my lady was in no small degree
astonished, and after this amusement—which was not distasteful to her—she again
fell asleep.  Then the good knight left her, and returned to my lord, who again
resumed his place by my lady's side as before, and made a fresh attack upon
her—so well did the exercise please him.  Thus the hours passed,—either in
sleeping or doing something else,—until day broke; and as he turned round in
bed, expecting to behold the tire-woman, he saw and knew that it was his wife,
who thereupon said to him.  "Are you not a recreant, cowardly, and wicked
whoremonger? You thought to have had my tire-woman, and it is upon me that you
have so many times essayed your unbridled and measureless lust. Thank God you
have been deceived, for no one else shall ever have that which belongs to me."
The good knight was both astonished and angry, and no wonder. And when he spoke
at last, he said.  "My dear, I cannot hide from you my folly, and I greatly
grieve ever to have undertaken such an enterprise. I beg of you to be satisfied
with what you have done, and never mention it for never in all my life shall it
occur again. That I promise you on my honour; and that you may never have
occasion to be reminded of it, I will send away the woman who has played this
trick upon me." The lady, who was more satisfied with this adventure than her
woman, and seeing how contrite her husband was, allowed herself to be
gained-over, but not without making some remonstrances and scoldings.  In the
end, all was arranged satisfactorily, but the knight, who had a flea in his
ear, as soon as he rose, went to his companion, to whom he related the
adventure at full length, and demanded from him two promises; the first was
that he should strictly promise to say nothing of the matter, and the second
that he should never meet his wife again.  The other, who was much vexed at
this unfortunate affair, comforted the knight as best he could, and promised to
perform his very reasonable requests; then mounted his horse and rode off. The
tire-woman, who was not to blame for the contretemps, bore the punishment
however, and was sent away. The knight and the lady lived long together without
her ever being aware that she had had to do with a strange knight.
