In the borders of Holland there formerly lived a foolish fellow, who determined
to do the worst thing he could—that is, get married. And so entranced was he
with the joys of wedlock, that although it was winter, he was so heated that
the night—which at that season was nine or ten hours—was not sufficiently long
to enable him to appease the ardent desires which he felt.  Wherever he met his
wife he put her on her back; whether it was in the chamber, or in the stable,
or any other place, he always attacked her. And this did not last only one or
two months, but longer than I care to tell, for it would not be convenient that
many women should hear of the zeal of this insatiable worker. What more shall I
say? He performed so often that his memory has never been forgotten, or will
be, in that country. And in truth the woman who formerly complained to the
Bailli of Amiens had not such good cause as this man's wife, but,
notwithstanding that she could often have dispensed with this pleasant task she
was always obedient to her husband, and never restive under the spur.  It
chanced one day, after dinner, when the weather was very fine, and the sun shot
its rays over the flower-embroidered earth, that the fancy came to this man and
his wife that they two would go alone to the woods, and they started on their
road.  Now, in order that you may learn my story, let me tell you that exactly
at the same time as these good folk went forth to play in the wood, it chanced
that a labourer had lost his calf, which he had put to graze in a field at the
edge of the wood; but when he came to search for his calf he could not find it,
at which he was sad at heart.  So he set out to search for the said calf both
in the wood and in the fields, and the places round about, to gather news of
it.  He bethought him that perchance it might have wandered into some thicket
to graze, or to some grassy ditch which it would not leave till it had filled
its belly; and to the end that he might the better see, without running hither
and thither, whether his surmise was right, he chose the highest and thickest
tree that he could find, and climbed into it, and when he had climbed to the
top of his tree, from whence he could see all the adjacent fields and wood, he
was sure that he was half-way towards finding his calf.  Whilst the honest
fellow was casting his eyes on all sides to find his calf, there came through
the wood our man and his wife, singing, playing, and rejoicing, as light hearts
will do in a pleasant place. Nor was it wonderful that the desire came to him
to tumble his wife in such a pleasant and suitable place, and looking now to
the right now to the left for a spot where he might conveniently take his
pleasure, he saw the big tree in which was the labourer—though he knew it
not—and under that tree he prepared to accomplish his pleasant purposes.  And
when he came to that place, his desires soon inflamed him, and he waited not to
begin his work, but attacked his wife and threw her on the ground, for at that
time he was very merry and his wife also.  He would fain see her both before
and behind, and for that reason took off her dress, so that she was only in her
petticoat, and that he pulled up very high in spite of her efforts, and that he
might the better see at his ease her beauties, he turned her this way and that,
and three or four times did his strong hand fall upon her big buttocks. Then he
turned her on the other side, and as he had regarded her backside, so did he
her front, to which the good, honest woman would in no wise consent, and
besides the resistance that she made, her tongue was not idle.  She called him
"ungracious", "a fool", "a madman", "disgusting", and many other things, but it
was no good; he was stronger than she was, and would make an inventory of all
her charms, and she was forced to let him,—preferring, like a wise woman, to
please her husband, than to annoy him by a refusal.  Having broken down all her
defences, this valiant man feasted his eyes on her front part, and, shame to
say, was not content until his hands had revealed to his eyes all the secrets
for which he searched.
