It chanced one day they were together, talking of the great affection they bore
each other, and devising how they could safely continue to take their pleasure
without some inkling of their dangerous pastime being known to her husband, who
was as jealous as a man could be.  You may fancy that more than one idea
occurred to them, which I here pass over, but the final conclusion and supreme
resolution of the good clerk, was to vow to act carefully and bring his
undertaking to a lucky termination,—in which he failed not, and this is how he
accomplished his end.  You must know that while the clerk was on intimate and
friendly terms with his mistress, and diligently served and pleased her, he was
at the same time not less diligent to serve and please his master, that he
might the better conceal his own faults and blind the eyes of the jealous
husband, who little suspected what was being prepared for him.  One day soon
after, our clerk, seeing that his master was well satisfied with him, spoke to
him when he was alone, most humbly, softly, and with great respect, and told
him that he had a great secret which he would willingly reveal if he dared.
And, it must be told, that like women, who have tears at their command and can
shed them whenever they like, our clerk, whilst he spoke, let fall from his
eyes tears in great abundance,—which any man would have taken to be signs of
sorrow, pity, and honest purpose.  When the poor abused master heard his clerk,
he was much astonished, and said, "What is the matter, my son, and why do you
weep?" "Alas, sir, I have much more cause than anyone else to be sorrowful, but
my case is so strange, and not the less pitiful, that it should be hidden;
nevertheless I have determined to tell you, if I can lay aside the fear which
for long has haunted me." "Do not weep, my son," replied his master, "and tell
me what it is, and I assure you that if it is possible for me to aid, you I
will willingly give you all the assistance I can." "Master," said the cunning
clerk, "I thank you; but I have thought the matter over, and I do not think my
tongue will be able to relate the great misfortune that I have long time
borne." "Leave all your grief and pratings," replied the master. "Nothing ought
to be hidden from me, as your master, and I wish to know what is the matter;
therefore come here and tell me." The clerk, who knew the length of his
master's foot, had to be much entreated, and pretended to be in great fear, and
shed great abundance of tears before he would accede and say what he had to
say, and then made his master promise that he would reveal the secret to no
man, for he would rather die than have his misfortune known.  The master having
given this promise, the clerk—pale, and trembling like a man who was going to
be hanged—told his story.  "My most worthy master, I know that all people, and
you amongst them, imagine that I am a natural man like any other, capable of
having connexion with a woman, and creating children; but I affirm and can
prove that I am not such—to my great sorrow, alas." And with these words he
pulled out his member and showed his bag. He had with much time and trouble
pushed up his testicles towards his lower belly, and so well concealed them
that it seemed as though he had none. Then he said, "Master, you now know my
misfortune, which I again beg of you not to let be known, and, moreover, I
humbly beg of you by all the services I have ever rendered,—which would have
been greater if my power had equalled my will—that you will allow me to pass
the rest of my life in some holy monastery, where I may spend my time in the
service of God, for I am of no use in the world."
