The borders of Burgundy furnish many adventures worthy to be written and
remembered, and have provided the present story, not to speak of many others
which could be related. I will here only speak of an adventure which happened
formerly in a big village on the river Ousche.  There was, and is still, a
mountain near, on which a hermit—of God knows what sort—made his residence, and
who under the cloak of hypocrisy did many strange things, which did not come to
the knowledge of the common people until the time when God would no longer
suffer his most damnable abuses to continue.  This holy hermit was during all
his life as lewd and mischievous as an old ape, but surpassed all ordinary
mortals in cunning. And this is what he did.  He sought amongst all the women
and pretty girls the one most worthy to be loved and desired, and resolved that
it was the daughter of a poor, simple woman,—a widow who was very devout and
charitable—and made up his mind that, if he could have his way, she should
become his prey.  One night, about midnight, when the weather was very rough
and stormy, he descended from the mountain and came to the village, and passing
by bye-roads and footpaths, came to where the mother and daughter lived,
without being seen or heard. He knew the house, which was not large, and to
which he had often been for devotional purposes.  He bored a hole in a part of
the wall not exposed, and near the spot where stood the bed of the simple widow
woman, and passing a long, hollow stick, with which he was provided, and
without awaking the widow, placed it near her ear, and said in a low voiced
three times, "Hear my voice, woman of God. I am an angel of the Creator, and
have been sent to you to announce that for your many good deeds which you have
performed there shall issue from your seed, that is your daughter, one who
shall unite, reform, and restore his bride the Church. And it shall be in this
manner. Thou shalt go to the mountain, to the holy hermit, and take thy
daughter, and relate to him at length that which God now commands you by me. He
shall know thy daughter, and from them shall spring a son, the elect of God,
and destined to fill the Holy Seat of Rome, who shall do such good deeds that
he may fitly be compared to St. Peter and St. Paul. Hearken to my voice! Obey
God!" The foolish widow, much astonished and surprised, and half ravished with
delight, really believed that God had sent this messenger. She vowed to herself
that she would not disobey, and it was long ere she slept again, and then not
very soundly, so greatly did she desire and await the day.  Meanwhile the good
hermit returned to his hermitage in the mountain. The much-desired day at last
dawned, and the sun pierced into the chamber of the said widow, and both mother
and daughter rose in great haste.  When they were up and dressed, and their
little household set in order, the mother asked her daughter if she had heard
anything in the night.  The daughter replied, "No, mother; nothing." "It was
not to you," said the mother, "that the message was first delivered, albeit it
concerns you greatly." Then she related at length the angel's message which God
had sent her, and asked her what she should reply thereto?  The girl, who was
like her mother, simple and devout, replied; "Praise be to God. Whatever
pleases you, mother, shall be done." "That is well spoken," replied the mother.
"Let us go to the mountain to the holy man, as the angel bade us." The hermit
was on the watch to see whether the foolish woman would bring her innocent
daughter, and beheld them coming. He left his door half open, and knelt down in
prayer in his chamber, in order that he might be found at his devotions.
