When she was in bed, and thinking over all these marvellous visions, this
perverse hypocrite came down from his mountain, placed his hollow stick to her
ear, as before, and commanded her, once for all, to obey the message and take
her daughter to the hermit for the purpose mentioned.  She did not forget, as
soon as it was day, to do her duty, and when she and her daughter had given
thanks to God, they set out for the hermitage, where the hermit came forth to
meet them, and saluted and blessed them in the name of God.  The good woman,
more joyous than ever, informed him of the last vision. The hermit took her by
the hand and led her into the chapel, and the girl followed them. There they
made most devout prayers to the all-powerful God who had vouchsafed to show
them this mystery.  Then the hermit delivered a short sermon, touching dreams,
visions, apparitions, and revelations, which often come to certain people, and
alluded to the cause for which they were there assembled, and God knows that he
preached well and righteously.  "Since God willed and commanded that he should
create a successor to the Pope, and had deigned to reveal His will not once or
twice, but three times, he must needs believe and conclude that great results
must follow from this deed. It is my opinion," he concluded, "that we should no
longer defer the execution of His orders, seeing that we have already delayed
so long, through refusing to believe in this holy vision." "That is well said,
father. What would it please you to do?" replied the old woman.  "You will
leave your fair daughter here," said the hermit, "and she and I will pray
together, and moreover do whatever God shall teach us." The good widow was much
pleased, and her daughter was content to obey. When the hermit found himself
alone with the damsel, he made her strip entirely as though he would baptise
her, and you may fancy that the hermit did not long remain dressed. But why
make a long story? He lay with her so long, and so often repeated it both in
his cell and at her home, that at last she could not leave the house for shame,
for her belly began to swell,—at which you need not be told she was overjoyed.
But if the daughter rejoiced to find herself pregnant, the mother rejoiced a
hundred times more, and the hypocritical hermit also pretended to rejoice at
the news, though inwardly he was bitterly vexed.  The poor credulous mother,
really believing that her daughter would bring forth a son who should in due
time be Pope of Rome, could not help relating the story to one of her intimate
friends, who was as much astonished as though she had found horns growing on
her head, but, nevertheless, suspected no trickery.  Ere long the neighbour had
told the other male and female neighbours, how the daughter of such an one was
pregnant by the holy hermit of a son who was to be Pope of Rome.  "And what I
tell you," she said, "the mother of the girl told me, and God revealed it to
her." The news soon spread through all the neighbouring towns. Soon afterwards
the girl was brought to bed, and duly delivered of a female child, at which she
and her foolish mother were both astonished and angry, and the neighbours also,
who expected the holy hermit to have been there to receive the child.  The
report spread quite as quickly as the previous one, and the hermit was one of
the first to hear of it, and quickly fled into another country—I know not
where—to deceive another woman or girl, or perhaps into the desert of Egypt to
perform penance, with a contrite heart, for his sin. However that may be, the
poor girl was dishonoured; which was a great pity, for she was fair, good, and
amiable.
