There lived formerly at Paris a President of the Court of Accounts, who was a
learned clerk, a knight, and a man of ripe age, but right joyous and pleasant
to both men and women.  This worthy lord had married a woman who was both
elderly and sickly, and by her had divers children. And amongst the other
damsels, waiting women, and servant maids in his house, was a serving-wench
whom nature had made most fair, and who did the household work; made the beds,
baked the bread, and did other low offices. The gentleman, who made love
whenever he found a chance, did not conceal from the fair wench his intentions
towards her, and made attempts upon her virtue, promising her many rich gifts,
and explaining to her that it was her duty to let him have his way, and trying
first this way and then that to seduce her. But he was grieved to find that he
could not induce her to return his love. The girl was wise and chaste, and not
so foolish as to grant her master any favour, but spoke him so fairly that he
did not lose heart, though he would have preferred a different kind of answer.
When he found that kindness was of no use, he tried harshness and rough words,
but the wench was not frightened, and told him that, "He might do as he
pleased, but whilst she had life she would never let him near her." The
gentleman, seeing that her mind was fully made-up, spake no more to her for
some days, but spared not loving looks and signs; which much annoyed her, and
if she had not feared to make discord between husband and wife, she would have
told the latter how unfaithful her spouse was, but, in the end, she resolved to
conceal this as long as she could.  The infatuation of the old man increased
every day, and begging and praying no longer sufficed. He went to her and
renewed his entreaties and vows, which he confirmed by a hundred thousand
oaths. But—to cut matters short—it was all no good; he could not obtain a
single word, or the least shadow of hope, that he would ever attain his
purpose.  Thereupon he left her, but he did not forget to say that if ever he
found a favourable opportunity she would have to comply with his wishes, or it
would be the worse for her.  The wench was not much frightened, thought no more
of it, and went about her duties as usual.  Some time afterwards, one Monday
morning, the pretty servant, having some pies to make, was sifting meal. Now
you must know that the room where she was thus engaged, was not far from her
master's bedroom, and he heard the noise of the sieve, and knew very well that
it was made by the servant-girl at her work.  He thought that perhaps she was
not alone, but, if she should be, he would never find a better chance.  He said
to himself, "Though she has often refused me by word of mouth, I shall succeed
at last if I only keep to my purpose." It was early dawn, and his wife was not
awake, at which he was glad. He stole quietly out of bed; put on his
dressing-gown and his slippers, and crept to the damsel's room so quietly that
she never knew he was there until she saw him.  The poor girl was much
astonished, and trembled; suspecting that her master had come to take that
which she would never give him.  Seeing she was frightened, he said nothing but
attacked her with such violence that he would soon have taken the place by
storm if she had not sued for peace. She said to him; "Alas, sir, I beg for
mercy! My life and honour are in your hands;—have pity on me!" "I care nothing
about honour," said her master, who was very hot and excited. "You are in my
hands and cannot escape me," and with that he attacked her more violently than
before.
