A gentleman of Burgundy went on some business to Paris, and lodged at a good
inn, for it was his custom always to seek out the best lodgings. He knew a
thing or two, and he noticed that the chambermaid did not look a sort of woman
who was afraid of a man. So, without much ado, or making two bites at a cherry,
he asked if he could sleep with her?  But she set her back up at once. "How
dare you make such a proposal to me," she said. "I would have you to know that
I am not one of those girls who bring scandal upon the houses in which they
live." And in short, for all he could say she refused to have anything to do
with him "for any money." The gentleman who knew well what all these
protestations were worth, said to her; "My dear, if fitting time and place were
given me, I would tell you something you would be glad to learn; but as,
perhaps, it might hurt your reputation if you were seen conversing with me,
talk to my valet, and he will arrange matters on my behalf." "I have nothing to
say either to him or to you," she replied, and with that she walked away, and
the gentleman called his valet, who was a clever rogue, and ordered him to
follow her and win her over at any cost.  The valet, who was well trained,
promised that he would perform his task, and, as soon as he found her, set to
work to employ honied phrases, and if she had not been of Paris, and not the
least cunning of the women of that city, his soft speeches and the promises he
made on behalf of his master, would soon have gained her heart.  But as it was,
after much talk between them, she cut matters short by saying; "I know well
what your master wants, but he shall not touch me unless I have ten crowns."
The servant reported this to his master, who was not so generous, or at least
not in such a case, as to give ten crowns to enjoy a kitchen wench.  "Be that
as it may," replied the valet, "she will not budge from that; and even then you
must use precautions in going to her chamber, for you must pass through that of
the host. What do you intend to do?" "By my oath!" said his master, "I regret
sorely having to pay ten crowns, but I am so smitten with the wench that I
cannot give her up. To the devil with avarice! she shall have the money."
"Shall I tell her then you will give her the money?" "Yes, in the devil's name!
Yes!" The valet found the girl, and told her she should have the money, and
perhaps something more.  "Very good," she replied.  To cut matters short, a
time was arranged for the gentleman to come to her, but, before she would show
him the way to her room, she insisted on the ten crowns being paid down.  The
Burgundian was not over-pleased, and as he was on the way to her chamber, it
struck him that he was paying dearly for his amusement, and he resolved that he
would play her a trick.  He stole into her room so quietly that neither the
host nor his wife awaked. There he undressed, and said to himself that he would
at least have his money's worth. He did marvels, and got as good as he sent.
What with jesting and other matters, the hours passed quickly, and dawn was
near. He was then more willing to sleep than to do anything else, but the fair
chambermaid said to him; "Sir, I have heard and seen so much of your nobleness,
honour, and courtesy that I have consented to allow you to take that which I
hold dearest in all the world. I now beg and request of you that you will at
once dress and hasten away, for it is now day, and if by chance my master or
mistress should come here, as is often their custom in the morning, and should
find you here, I should be dishonoured, nor would it do you any good." "I care
not," quoth he, "what good or evil may happen, but here I will remain, and
sleep at my ease and leisure before I leave. I am entitled to that for my
money. Do you think you have so easily earned my ten crowns? You took them
quickly enough.
