Moved by a strong desire to see and know foreign countries, and to meet with
adventures, a worthy and rich merchant of London left his fair and good wife,
his children, relations, friends, estates, and the greater part of his
possessions, and quitted the kingdom, well furnished with money and great
abundance of merchandise, such as England can supply to foreign countries, and
with many other things which, for the sake of brevity, I do not mention here.
On this first voyage, the good merchant wandered about for a space of five
years, during which time his good wife looked after his property, disposed of
much merchandise profitably, and managed so well that her husband, when he
returned at the end of five years, greatly praised her, and loved her more than
ever.  The merchant, not content with the many strange and wonderful things he
had seen, or with the large fortune he had made, four or five months after his
return, again set forth in quest of adventures in foreign lands, both Christian
and pagan, and stayed there so long that ten years passed before his wife again
saw him, but he often wrote to her, that she might know that he was still
alive.  She was young and lusty, and wanted not any of the goods that God could
give, except the presence of her husband. His long absence constrained her to
provide herself with a lover, by whom shortly she had a fine boy.  This son was
nourished and brought up with the others, his half-brothers, and, when the
merchant returned, was about seven years old.  Great were the rejoicings
between husband and wife when he came back, and whilst they were conversing
pleasantly, the good woman, at the demand of her husband, caused to be brought
all their children, not omitting the one who had been born during the absence
of him whose name she bore.  The worthy merchant seeing all these children, and
remembering perfectly how many there should be, found one over and above; at
which he was much astonished and surprised, and he inquired of his wife who was
this fair son, the youngest of their children?  "Who is he?" said she; "On my
word, husband, he is our son! Who else should he be?" "I do not know," he
replied, "but, as I have never seen him before, is it strange that I should
ask?" "No, by St. John," said she; "but he is our son." "How can that be?" said
her husband. "You were not pregnant when I left." "Truly I was not, so far as I
know," she replied, "but I can swear that the child is yours, and that no other
man but you has ever lain with me." "I never said so," he answered, "but, at
any rate, it is ten years since I left, and this child does not appear more
than seven. How then can it be mine? Did you carry him longer than you did the
others?" "By my oath, I know not!" she said; "but what I tell you is true.
Whether I carried it longer than the others I know not, and if you did not make
it before you left, I do not know how it could have come, unless it was that,
not long after your departure, I was one day in our garden, when suddenly there
came upon me a longing and desire to eat a leaf of sorrel, which at that time
was thickly covered with snow. I chose a large and fine leaf, as I thought, and
ate it, but it was only a white and hard piece of snow. And no sooner had I
eaten it than I felt myself to be in the same condition as I was before each of
my other children was born. In fact, a certain time afterwards, I bore you this
fair son." The merchant saw at once that he was being fooled, but he pretended
to believe the story his wife had told him, and replied; "My dear, though what
you tell me is hardly possible, and has never happened to anyone else, let God
be praised for what He has sent us. If He has given us a child by a miracle, or
by some secret method of which we are ignorant, He has not forgotten to provide
us with the wherewithal to keep it." When the good woman saw that her husband
was willing to believe the tale she told him, she was greatly pleased. 
