In this province, there lived a young man, an orphan, who at the death of his
father and mother had become rich and powerful. He was stupid, ignorant, and
disagreeable, but hard-working and knew well how to take care of himself and
his affairs, and for this reason, many persons,—even people of condition,—were
willing to give him their daughter in marriage.  One of these damsels, above
all others, pleased the friends and relations of our Champenois, for her
beauty, goodness, riches, and so forth. They told him that it was time he
married.  "You are now," they said, "twenty-three years old, and there could
not be a better time. And if you will listen to us, we have searched out for
you a fair and good damsel who seems to us just suited to you. It is such an
one—you know her well;" and they told him her name.  The young man, who cared
little whether he was married or not, as long as he lost no money by it,
replied that he would do whatever they wished. "Since you think it will be to
my advantage, manage the business the best way you can, and I will follow your
advice and instructions." "You say well," replied these good people. "We will
select your wife as carefully as though it were for ourselves, or one of our
children." To cut matters short, a little time afterwards our Champenois was
married; but on the first night, when he was sleeping with his wife, he, never
having mounted on any Christian woman, soon turned his back to her, and a few
poor kisses was all she had of him, but nothing on her back. You may guess his
wife was not well pleased at this; nevertheless, she concealed her discontent.
This unsatisfactory state of things lasted ten days, and would have continued
longer if the girl's mother had not put a stop to it.  It should be known to
you that the young man was unskilled in the mysteries of wedlock, for during
the lifetime of his parents he had been kept with a tight hand, and, above all
things, had been forbidden to play at the beast with two backs, lest he should
take too much delight therein, and waste all his patrimony. This was wise of
his parents, for he was not a young man likely to be loved for his good looks.
As he would do nothing to anger his father or mother, and was, moreover, not of
an amorous disposition, he had always preserved his chastity, though his wife
would willingly have deprived him of it, if she had known how to do so
honestly.  One day the mother of the bride came to her daughter, and asked her
all about her husband's state and condition, and the thousand other things
which women like to know. To all of these questions the bride replied that her
husband was a good man, and she hoped and believed that she would be happy with
him.  But the old woman knew by her own experience that there are more things
in married life than eating and drinking, so she said to her daughter; "Come
here, and tell me, on your word of honour, how does he acquit himself at
night?" When the girl heard this question she was so vexed and ashamed that she
could not reply, and her eyes filled with tears. Her mother understood what
these tears meant, and said; "Do not weep, my child! Speak out boldly! I am
your mother, and you ought not to conceal anything from me, or be afraid of
telling me. Has he done nothing to you yet?" The poor girl, having partly
recovered, and being re-assured by her mother's words, ceased her tears, but
yet could make no reply. Thereupon, her mother asked again; "Lay aside your
grief and answer me honestly: has he done nothing to you yet?"
