In Normandy there is a fair nunnery, the Abbess of which was young, fair, and
well-made. It chanced that she fell ill. The good sisters who were charitable
and devout, hastened to visit her, and tried to comfort her, and do all that
lay in their power. And when they found she was getting no better, they
commanded one of the sisters to go to Rouen, and take her water to a renowned
doctor of that place.  So the next day one of the nuns started on this errand,
and when she arrived there she showed the water to the physician, and described
at great length the illness of the Lady Abbess, how she slept, ate, drank, etc.
The learned doctor understood the case, both from his examination of the water,
and the information given by the nun, and then he gave his prescription.  Now I
know that it is the custom in many cases to give a prescription in writing,
nevertheless this time he gave it by word of mouth, and said to the nun; "Fair
sister, for the abbess to recover her health there is but one remedy, and that
is that she must have company with a man; otherwise in a short time she will
grew so bad that death will be the only remedy." Our nun was much astonished to
hear such sad news, and said, "Alas! Master John! is there no other method by
which our abbess can recover her health?" "Certainly not," he replied; "there
is no other, and moreover, you must make haste to do as I have bid you, for if
the disease is not stopped and takes its course, there is no man living who
could cure it." The good nun, though much disconcerted, made haste to announce
the news to the Abbess, and by the aid of her stout cob, and the great desire
she had to be at home, made such speed that the abbess was astonished to see
her returned.  "What says the doctor, my dear?" cried the abbess. "Is there any
fear of death?" "You will be soon in good health if God so wills, madam," said
the messenger. "Be of good cheer, and take heart." "What! has not the doctor
ordered me any medicine?" said the Abbess.  "Yes," was the reply, and then the
nun related how the doctor had looked at her water, and asked her age, and how
she ate and slept, etc. "And then in conclusion he ordered that you must have,
somehow or other, carnal connection with some man, or otherwise you will
shortly be dead, for there is no other remedy for your complaint." "Connection
with a man!" cried the lady. "I would rather die a thousand times if it were
possible." And then she went on, "Since it is thus, and my illness is incurable
and deadly unless I take such a remedy, let God be praised! I will die
willingly. Call together quickly all the convent!" The bell was rung, and all
the nuns flocked round the Abbess, and, when they were all in the chamber, the
Abbess, who still had the use of her tongue, however ill she was, began a long
speech concerning the state of the church, and in what condition she had found
it and how she left it, and then went on to speak of her illness, which was
mortal and incurable as she well knew and felt, and as such and such a
physician had also declared.  "And so, my dear sisters, I recommend to you our
church, and that you pray for my poor soul." At these words, tears in great
abundance welled from all eyes, and the heart's fountain of the convent was
moved. This weeping lasted long, and none of the company spoke.  After some
time, the Prioress, who was wise and good, spoke for all the convent, and said;
"Madam, your illness—what it is, God, from whom nothing is hidden, alone
knows—vexes us greatly, and there is not one of us who would not do all in her
power to aid your recovery. We therefore pray you to spare nothing, not even
the goods of the Church, for it would be better for us to lose the greater part
of our temporal goods than be deprived of the spiritual profit which your
presence gives us."
