Formerly there was a gentleman living at Bruges who was so often and so long in
the company of a certain pretty girl that at last he made her belly swell.  And
about the same time that he was aware of this, the Duke called together his
men-at-arms, and our gentleman was forced to abandon his lady-love and go with
others to serve the said lord, which he willingly did. But, before leaving, he
provided sponsors and a nurse against the time his child should come into the
world, and lodged the mother with good people to whose care he recommended her,
and left money for her. And when he had done all this as quickly as he could,
he took leave of his lady, and promised that, if God pleased, he would return
quickly.  You may fancy if she wept when she found that he whom she loved
better than any one in the world, was going away. She could not at first speak,
so much did her tears oppress her heart, but at last she grew calmer when she
saw that there was nothing else to be done.  About a month after the departure
of her lover, desire burned in her heart, and she remembered the pleasures she
had formerly enjoyed, and of which the unfortunate absence of her friend now
deprived her. The God of Love, who is never idle, whispered to her of the
virtues and riches of a certain merchant, a neighbour, who many times, both
before and since the departure of her lover, had solicited her love, so that
she decided that if he ever returned to the charge he should not be sent away
discouraged, and that even if she met him in the street she would behave
herself in such a way as would let him see that she liked him.  Now it happened
that the day after she arrived at this determination, Cupid sent round the
merchant early in the morning to present her with dogs and birds and other
gifts, which those who seek after women are always ready to present.  He was
not rebuffed, for if he was willing to attack she was not the less ready to
surrender, and prepared to give him even more than he dared to ask; for she
found in him such chivalry, prowess, and virtue that she quite forgot her old
lover, who at that time suspected nothing.  The good merchant was much pleased
with his new lady, and they so loved each other, and their wills, desires, and
thoughts so agreed, that it was as though they had but a single heart between
them. They could not be content until they were living together, so one night
the wench packed up all her belongings and went to the merchant's house, thus
abandoning her old lover, her landlord and his wife, and a number of other good
people to whose care she had been recommended.  She was not a fool, and as soon
as she found herself well lodged, she told the merchant she was pregnant, at
which he was very joyful, believing that he was the cause; and in about seven
months the wench brought forth a fine boy, and the adoptive father was very
fond both of the child and its mother.  A certain time afterwards the gentleman
returned from the war, and came to Bruges, and as soon as he decently could,
took his way to the house where he had left his mistress, and asked news of her
from those whom he had charged to lodge her and clothe her, and aid her in her
confinement.  "What!" they said. "Do you not know? Have you not had the letters
which were written to you?" "No, by my oath," said he. "What has happened?'
"Holy Mary!" they replied, "you have good reason to ask. You had not been gone
more than a month when she packed up her combs and mirrors and betook herself
to the house of a certain merchant, who is greatly attached to her. And, in
fact, she has there been brought to bed of a fine boy. The merchant has had the
child christened, and believes it to be his own." "By St. John! that is
something new," said the gentleman, "but, since she is that sort of a woman,
she may go to the devil. The merchant may have her and keep her, but as for the
child I am sure it is mine, and I want it."
