In the duchy of Brabant—not so long ago but that the memory of it is fresh in
the present day—happened a strange thing, which is worthy of being related, and
is not unfit to furnish a story. And in order that it should be publicly known
and reported, here is the tale.  In the household of a great baron of the said
country there lived and resided a young, gracious, and kind gentleman, named
Gerard, who was greatly in love with a damsel of the said household, named
Katherine. And when he found opportunity, he ventured to tell her of his
piteous case. Most people will be able to guess the answer he received, and
therefore, to shorten matters, I omit it here.  In due time Gerard and
Katherine loved each other so warmly that there was but one heart and one will
between them. This loyal and perfect love endured no little time—indeed two
years passed away. Love, who blinds the eyes of his disciples, had so blinded
these two that they did not know that this affection, which they thought
secret, was perceived by every one; there was not a man or a woman in the
chateau who was not aware of it—in fact the matter was so noised abroad that
all the talk of the household was of the loves of Gerard and Katherine.  These
two poor, deluded fools were so much occupied with their own affairs that they
did not suspect their love affairs were discussed by others. Envious persons,
or those whom it did not concern, brought this love affair to the knowledge of
the master and mistress of the two lovers, and it also came to the ears of the
father and mother of Katherine.  Katherine was informed by a damsel belonging
to the household, who was one of her friends and companions, that her love for
Gerard had been discovered and revealed both to her father and mother, and also
to the master and mistress of the house.  "Alas, what is to be done, my dear
sister and friend?" asked Katherine. "I am lost, now that so many persons know,
or guess at, my condition. Advise me, or I am ruined, and the most unfortunate
woman in the world," and at these words her eyes filled with tears, which
rolled down her fair cheeks and even fell to the edge of her robe.  Her friend
was very vexed to see her grief, and tried to console her.  "My sister," she
said, "it is foolish to show such great grief; for, thank God, no one can
reproach you with anything that touches your honour or that of your friends. If
you have listened to the vows of a gentleman, that is not a thing forbidden by
the Court of Honour, it is even the path, the true road, to arrive there. You
have no cause for grief, for there is not a soul living who can bring a charge
against you. But, at any rate, I should advise that, to stop chattering tongues
which are discussing your love affairs, your lover, Gerard, should, without
more ado, take leave of our lord and lady, alleging that he is to set out on a
long voyage, or take part in some war now going on, and, under that excuse,
repair to some house and wait there until God and Cupid have arranged matters.
He will keep you informed by messages how he is, and you will do the same to
him; and by that time the rumours will have ceased, and you can communicate
with one another by letter until better times arrive. And do not imagine that
your love will cease—it will be as great, or greater, than ever, for during a
long time you will only hear from each other occasionally, and that is one of
the surest ways of preserving love." The kind and good advice of this gentle
dame was followed, for as soon as Katherine found means to speak to her lover,
Gerard, she told him how the secret of their love had been discovered and had
come to the knowledge of her father and mother, and the master and mistress of
the house.  "And you may believe," she said, "that it did not reach that point
without much talk on the part of those of the household and many of the
neighbours. And since Fortune is not so friendly to us as to permit us to live
happily as we began, but menaces us with further troubles, it is necessary to
be fore-armed against them. Therefore, as the matter much concerns me, and
still more you, I will tell you my opinion."
