To shorten the story, he vowed and swore that he would never sleep with her if
it were not in his own house, and he conducted thither the bride's father and
mother, and many of her relations and friends. He put his house in order to
receive them, and to do so arrived there a day before them. And as soon as he
alighted, he took the priest's breeches, and hung them in the chamber, by the
black bread and the horse's skin.  Most cordially received were the relations
and friends of the fair bride, and they were much astonished to see the house
of the young gentleman so well furnished with vessels, carpets, and all other
kinds of furniture, and they thought themselves lucky to have procured such a
husband for the girl.  As they were looking round, they came to the great
chamber, which was all hung round with fair tapestry, and they perceived the
brown bread, the horse's skin, and a pair of breeches hanging there; at which
they were much astonished, and asked their host the meaning.  He replied that
he would willingly, and for a very good reason, tell them the meaning,—but
after they had eaten.  Dinner was prepared, and God knows that it was well
served, They had no sooner dined, than they demanded the interpretation of the
mystery of the black bread, the horse's skin etc., and the worthy young
gentleman related the story at length, and told how his father,—being on his
death-bed as has been already narrated,—gave him three counsels.  "The first
was never to remain in a house where they gave me black bread. I paid no heed
to this advice, for, after his death, I frequented the house of a neighbour,
who became jealous of his wife, and in place of the white bread with which I
was always served, gave me black; so in recollection and acknowledgment of the
truth of that advice, I hung that piece of black bread there. The second
counsel that my father gave me, was never to gallop my horse in a valley. I did
not bear that in mind, and suffered for it, for one day, when riding in a
valley after a hare pursued by my dogs, my horse fell and broke its neck, and
it is a wonder I was not badly hurt. To remind me of my escape from death, the
skin of the horse I then lost is hung there. The third counsel and advice that
my father—whose soul is with God—gave me, was never to marry a woman of a
strange nation. In this also I failed, and I will tell you what happened to me.
The first night after I was married to your daughter, and you refused to let me
sleep with her, I was lodged in a chamber close to hers, and as the partition
between her and me was but thin, I pierced a hole with my sword, and I saw the
chaplain of your household come and lie with her; but he left his breeches
under the bed when he rose in the morning—which breeches I obtained possession
of, and have hung them there as evidence of the everlasting truth of the third
counsel that my late father gave me, and which I had not duly remembered and
borne in mind; but in order that I may not again fall into the same errors,
have placed here these three objects to render me prudent. And because—thank
God—I am not so much committed to your daughter that she cannot now leave me, I
would ask of you to take her back, and return to your own country, for as long
as I live I will never come near her. But, because I have made you come a long
way to show you that I am not the sort of man to take a priest's leavings, I am
prepared to pay your expenses." The others did not know what to say, but seeing
that their misdeeds were discovered, and seeing also that being far from their
own country, force would not be on their side, were content to take the money
for their expenses, and return whence they came; for if they had staked more
they would have lost more.  Such, as you have heard, were the three counsels
which the good father gave his son, and which should not be forgotten; let
everyone remember them, so far as they concern himself.
