A noble knight of Flanders—young, lusty, and a good jouster, dancer, and
singer, was once living in the county of Hainault with another noble knight of
the same rank then living there, though he had a fine residence in Flanders.
Love—as often happens—was the cause that he remained there, for he was much
smitten by a damsel of Maubeuge, and God knows what he did for her; often
giving jousts, masquerades, banquets, and whatever else was possible, and that
he thought would please his mistress.  He was to some extent in her good graces
for a time, but not so much as he wished to be. His friend, the knight of
Hainault, who knew of his love affair, did all he could to assist him, and it
was not his fault that his friend did not succeed better. But why make a long
story? The good knight of Flanders, do all he would, and his friend also, could
never obtain from the lady the supreme favour, but found her still harsh and
unkind.  At last he was compelled to return to Flanders; so he took leave of
his mistress, and left his friend there, and promised that if he did not return
shortly he would often write to her, and give news about himself; and she
promised the same on her side.  Now it came to pass that a few days after the
knight had returned to Flanders, that the lady wished to go on a pilgrimage,
and made her arrangements accordingly.  And when the carriage was in front of
her house, and the waggoner, who was a lusty fellow, strong and active, in it,
preparing it for her, that she threw a cushion on his head, which caused him to
fall on his hands and knees, at which she laughed loud and long.  "By God,
mademoiselle, you made me fall, but I will have my revenge, and before night I
will make you tumble." "You would not be so unkind," she replied, and so saying
she took another cushion, and when the waggoner was off his guard, she knocked
him down again, and then laughed more heartily than ever.  "What is this,
mademoiselle?" cried the waggoner. "Do you want to hurt me? I swear that if I
were near you I would take my revenge at once." "What would you do?" said she.
"If I were up there I would show you," he replied.  "You would do miracles—to
hear you talk; but you would never dare to come." "No?" said he. "You shall
see." He jumped out of the vehicle, entered the house, and ran upstairs, where
he found the damsel in her petticoat, and as happy as she could be. He at once
began to assail her, and—to cut matters short—she was not sorry to let him take
what she could not in honour have given him.  At the end of the appointed time
she brought forth a fine little waggoner. The matter was not so secret but what
the knight of Hainault heard of it, and was much surprised.  He wrote in haste,
and sent the letter by a messenger to his friend in Flanders, to say that his
mistress had had a child with the help of a waggoner.  You may guess that the
other was much surprised at the news, and he quickly came to Hainault to his
friend, and begged of him to come and see his mistress and upbraid her with her
misdeeds.  Although she was keeping herself concealed at the time, the two
knights found means to come to her. She was much ashamed and vexed to see them,
as she well knew she would hear nothing pleasant from them, but she plucked up
her courage, and put on the best countenance she could.  They began by talking
of various matters; and then the good knight of Flanders began his tirade, and
called her all the names he could think of.
