John Stockton was much pleased with this answer, and thanked his hostess, and
told her that it would not be his fault if he did not come at the appointed
hour.  This conversation took place on the Monday, after dinner. But it should
here be stated that Thomas Brampton had, unknown to his friend John Stockton,
made similar requests to their hostess, but she would not grant his desire, but
now raised his hopes and then dashed them to the ground, saying that he must
have but a poor idea of her virtue, and that, if she did what he wished, she
was sure that her husband and his relations and friends would take her life.
To this Thomas replied; "My beloved mistress and hostess, I am a nobleman, and
for no consideration would I bring upon you blame or dishonour, or I should be
unworthy of the name of a gentleman. Believe me, that I would guard your honour
as I do my own, and would rather die than reveal your secret; and that there is
no friend or other person in the world, however dear to me, to whom I would
relate our love-affair." She, therefore, noting the great affection and desire
of the said Thomas, told him, on the Wednesday following the day on which she
had given John the gracious reply recorded above—that, as he had a great desire
to do her any service, she would not be so ungrateful as not to repay him. And
then she told him how it was arranged that her husband should watch the morrow
night, like the other chief householders of the town, in compliance with the
regulation made by the lords then staying in Calais. But as—thank God—her
husband had powerful friends to speak to the Cardinal for him, he had only to
watch half the night, that is to say from midnight till the morning, and that
if Thomas wished to speak to her during that time, she would gladly hear him,
but, for God's sake let him come so secretly that no blame could attach to her.
Thomas replied that he desired nothing better, and with that he took leave of
her.  On the morrow, which was Thursday, at vespers, after the bell had rung
for the watch, John Stockton did not forget to appear at the hour his hostess
had appointed. He went to her chamber, and found her there quite alone, and she
received him and made him welcome, for the table was laid.  John requested that
he might sup with her, that they might the better talk together,—which she
would not at first grant, saying that it might cause scandal if he were found
with her. But she finally gave way, and the supper—which seemed to John to take
a long time—being finished, he embraced his hostess, and they enjoyed
themselves together, both naked.  Before he entered the chamber, he had put on
one of his fingers, a gold ring set with a large fine diamond, of the value of,
perhaps, thirty nobles. And in playing together, the ring slipped from his
finger in the bed without his knowing it.  When it was about 11 o'clock, the
damsel begged him kindly to dress and leave, that he might not be found by her
husband, whom she expected as soon as midnight sounded, and that he would guard
her honour as he had promised.  He, supposing that her husband would return
soon, rose, dressed, and left the chamber as soon as the clock struck twelve,
and without remembering the diamond he had left in the bed.  Not far from the
door of the chamber John Stockton met Thomas Brampton, whom he mistook for his
host, Richard. Thomas,—who had come at the hour the lady appointed,—made a
similar mistake, and took John Stockton for Richard, and waited a few moments
to see which way he would go.  Having watched the other disappear, Thomas went
to the chamber, found the door ajar, and entered. The lady pretended to be much
frightened and alarmed, and asked Thomas, with doubt and fear, whether he had
met her husband who had just left to join the watch? He replied that he had met
a man, but did not know whether it was her husband or another, and had waited a
little in order to see which way he would go.
