To come to my story, this fur hat,—that is to say this councillor of
Parliament,—fell in love with the wife of a cobbler of Paris,—a good, and
pretty woman, and ready-witted. The fur hat managed, by means of money and
other ways, to get an interview with the cobbler's fair wife on the quiet and
alone, and if he had been enamoured of her before he enjoyed her, he was still
more so afterwards, which she perceived and was on her guard, and resolved to
stand off till she obtained her price.  His love for her was at such fever
heat, that by commands, prayers, promises, and gifts, he tried to make her come
to him, but she would not, in order to aggravate and increase his malady. He
sent ambassadors of all sorts to his mistress, but it was no good—she would
rather die than come.  Finally—to shorten the story—in order to make her come
to him as she used formerly to do, he promised her in the presence of three or
four witnesses, that he would take her to wife if her husband died.  As soon as
she obtained this promise, she consented to visit him at various times when she
could get away, and he continued to be as love-sick as ever. She, knowing her
husband to be old, and having the aforesaid promise, already looked upon
herself as the Councillor's wife.  But a short time afterwards, the
much-desired death of the cobbler was known and published, and his fair widow
at once went with a bound to the abode of the fur cap, who received her gladly,
and again promised to make her his wife.  These two good people—the fur cap,
and his mistress, the cobbler's widow—were now together; But it often happens
that what can be got without trouble is not worth the trouble of getting, and
so it was in this case, for our fur cap soon began to weary of the cobbler's
widow, and his love for her grew cold. She often pressed him to perform the
marriage he had promised, but he said; "By my word, my dear, I can never marry,
for I am a churchman, and hold such and such benefices, as you know. The
promise I formerly made you is null and void, and was caused by the great love
I bear you, to win you to me the more easily." She, believing that he did
belong to the Church, and seeing that she was as much mistress of his house as
though she had been his wedded wife, went her accustomed way, and never
troubled more about the marriage; but at last was persuaded by the fine words
of our fur cap to leave him, and marry a barber, their neighbour, to whom the
Councillor gave 300 gold crowns, and God knows that the woman also was well
provided with clothes.  Now you must know that our fur cap had a definite
object in arranging this marriage, which would never have come off if he had
not told his mistress that in future he intended to serve God, and live on his
benefices, and give up everything to the Church. But he did just the contrary,
as soon as he had got rid of her by marrying her to the barber; for about a
year later, he secretly treated for the hand of the daughter of a rich and
notable citizen of Paris.  The marriage was agreed to and arranged, and a day
fixed for the wedding. He also disposed of his benefices, which were only held
by simple tonsure.  These things were known throughout Paris, and came to the
knowledge of the cobbler's widow, now the barber's wife, and, as you may guess,
she was much surprised.  "Oh, the traitor," she said; "has he deceived me like
this? He deserted me under pretence of serving God, and made me over to another
man. But, by Our Lady of Clery, the matter shall not rest here." Nor did it,
for she cited our fur cap before the Bishop, and there her advocate stated his
case clearly and courteously, saying that the fur cap had promised the
cobbler's wife, in the presence of several witnesses, that if her husband died
he would make her his wife. When her husband died, the Councillor had kept her
for about a year, and then handed her over to a barber.
