At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding
pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to be believed, was even
more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with bandits.  In
the country near D—— a man lived quite alone. This man, we will state at once,
was a former member of the Convention. His name was G—— Member of the
Convention, G—— was mentioned with a sort of horror in the little world of D——
A member of the Convention—can you imagine such a thing? That existed from the
time when people called each other thou, and when they said "citizen." This man
was almost a monster. He had not voted for the death of the king, but almost.
He was a quasi-regicide. He had been a terrible man. How did it happen that
such a man had not been brought before a provost's court, on the return of the
legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if you please;
clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment for life. An example,
in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like all the rest of those people.
Gossip of the geese about the vulture.  Was G—— a vulture after all? Yes; if he
were to be judged by the element of ferocity in this solitude of his. As he had
not voted for the death of the king, he had not been included in the decrees of
exile, and had been able to remain in France.  He dwelt at a distance of
three-quarters of an hour from the city, far from any hamlet, far from any
road, in some hidden turn of a very wild valley, no one knew exactly where. He
had there, it was said, a sort of field, a hole, a lair. There were no
neighbors, not even passers-by. Since he had dwelt in that valley, the path
which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass. The locality was
spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman.  Nevertheless, the
Bishop meditated on the subject, and from time to time he gazed at the horizon
at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the former member of the
Convention, and he said, "There is a soul yonder which is lonely." And he
added, deep in his own mind, "I owe him a visit." But, let us avow it, this
idea, which seemed natural at the first blush, appeared to him after a moment's
reflection, as strange, impossible, and almost repulsive. For, at bottom, he
shared the general impression, and the old member of the Convention inspired
him, without his being clearly conscious of the fact himself, with that
sentiment which borders on hate, and which is so well expressed by the word
estrangement.  Still, should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to
recoil? No. But what a sheep!  The good Bishop was perplexed. Sometimes he set
out in that direction; then he returned.  Finally, the rumor one day spread
through the town that a sort of young shepherd, who served the member of the
Convention in his hovel, had come in quest of a doctor; that the old wretch was
dying, that paralysis was gaining on him, and that he would not live over
night.—"Thank God!" some added.  The Bishop took his staff, put on his cloak,
on account of his too threadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of
the evening breeze which was sure to rise soon, and set out.  The sun was
setting, and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop arrived at the
excommunicated spot. With a certain beating of the heart, he recognized the
fact that he was near the lair. He strode over a ditch, leaped a hedge, made
his way through a fence of dead boughs, entered a neglected paddock, took a few
steps with a good deal of boldness, and suddenly, at the extremity of the waste
land, and behind lofty brambles, he caught sight of the cavern.
