But the misfortune was that they could find no means of meeting secretly to
open their hearts to each other, and in no case would they do so in the
presence of a third person, however good a friend he or she might be. At last,
after many sad nights and days, Love, who aids and succours his loyal servants
when he pleases, procured for them the much-desired day, when the poor
husband,—the most jealous man living—was obliged to leave his house on account
of some pressing business by which he would gain a large sum if he were
present, and would lose his money if he were absent. By gaining which sum he
reaped an even better reward—that of being called a cuckold as well as a
jealous man—for he had no sooner left his house than the gentleman, who was
watching for no other quarry, popped into the house, and without staying long,
at once performed that for which he came, and received from his lady all that a
lover can and dare demand; as pleasantly and as leisurely as they could both
wish.  And they did not suppose that the husband would surprise them, but
looked forward to a time of unalloyed pleasure, hoping that the night would
complete that which the most joyful day—by far too short—had begun, and really
believing that the poor devil of a husband could not return before dinner-time
the following day at the earliest.  But it happened otherwise, for the devil
brought him home. I know not, and care not to know how it was that he could get
through his business so quickly, suffice it to say that he came back that
night, at which the company—that is to say the two lovers—was much alarmed, and
so taken by surprise, (for they did not expect this inopportune return) that
the poor gentleman could think of nothing else to do than to hide in the privy
which was close to the chamber, hoping to escape by some means that his
mistress would find before the knight came into the chamber.  It chanced that
our knight, who that day had ridden sixteen or eighteen long leagues, was so
tired and stiff that he would sup in his chamber, where he had his boots taken
off, and would not go to the dining-hall.  You may guess that the poor
gentleman paid dear for the pleasure he had had that day, for he was half dead
with hunger, cold, and fear; and, to aggravate his misfortune, he was taken
with such a horrible cough that it was wonderful that it was not heard in the
chamber, where were assembled, the knight, the lady, and the other knights of
the household.  The lady, whose eyes and ears were open for any sign of her
lover, heard him by chance, and her heart sank within her, for she feared that
her husband would hear also. Soon after supper she found an opportunity to go
to the privy, and told her lover to take care, for God's sake, and not cough
like that.  "Alas, my dear," he said, "I cannot help it. God knows how I am
punished. And for God's sake think of some way of getting me out of this." "I
will," she said, and with that she went away, and the good squire began his
song over again, so loud indeed that he was much afraid he would be heard in
the chamber; and might have been had not the lady talked very loudly in order
to drown the noise.  When the squire had this fresh attack of coughing, he knew
of nothing better to do to prevent being heard than to stuff his head down the
hole of the privy, where he was well "incensed", God knows, by the stuff
therein, but he preferred that to being heard. In short, he was there a long
time, with his head down the hole, spitting, sniffing, and coughing so much
that it seemed as though he would never do anything else.  After this fit
finished, the cough left him, and then he tried to draw out his head, but it
was not in his power, so far had he pushed his shoulders through, and you may
fancy that he was not very comfortable. In short he could not find means to get
out, try as he would. He scraped his neck, and nearly pulled his ears off, and
in the end, by God's will, he pulled so hard that he tore away the seat of the
privy, which hung round his neck. 
