Now, on a day, the Queen had fallen asleep after meat, and on her awaking would
walk a little in the garden. She called her companion to her, and the two went
forth to be glad amongst the flowers. As they looked across the sea they marked
a ship drawing near the land, rising and falling upon the waves. Very fearful
was the Queen thereat, for the vessel came to anchorage, though there was no
helmsman to direct her course. The dame's face became sanguine for dread, and
she turned her about to flee, because of her exceeding fear. Her maiden, who
was of more courage than she, stayed her mistress with many comforting words.
For her part she was very desirous to know what this thing meant. She hastened
to the shore, and laying aside her mantle, climbed within this wondrous vessel.
Thereon she found no living soul, save only the knight sleeping fast within the
pavilion. The damsel looked long upon the knight, for pale he was as wax, and
well she deemed him dead. She returned forthwith to the Queen, and told her of
this marvel, and of the good knight who was slain.

"Let us go together on the ship," replied the lady. "If he be dead we may give
him fitting burial, and the priest shall pray meetly for his soul. Should he be
yet alive perchance he will speak, and tell us of his case."

Without more tarrying the two damsels mounted on the ship, the lady before, and
her maiden following after. When the Queen entered in the pavilion she stayed
her feet before the bed, for joy and grief of what she saw. She might not
refrain her eyes from gazing on the knight, for her heart was ravished with his
beauty, and she sorrowed beyond measure, because of his grievous hurt. To
herself she said, "In a bad hour cometh the goodly youth." She drew near the
bed, and placing her hand upon his breast, found that the flesh was warm, and
that the heart beat strongly in his side. Gugemar awoke at the touch, and
saluted the dame as sweetly as he was able, for well he knew that he had come
to a Christian land. The lady, full of thought, returned him his salutation
right courteously, though the tears were yet in her eyes. Straightway she asked
of him from what realm he came, and of what people, and in what war he had
taken his hurt.

"Lady," answered Gugemar, "in no battle I received this wound. If it pleases
you to hear my tale I will tell you the truth, and in nothing will I lie. I am
a knight of Little Brittany. Yesterday I chased a wonderful white deer within
the forest. The shaft with which I struck her to my hurt, returned again on me,
and caused this wound upon my thigh, which may never be searched, nor made
whole. For this wondrous Beast raised her plaint in a mortal tongue. She cursed
me loudly, with many evil words, swearing that never might this sore be healed,
save by one only damsel in the world, and her I know not where to find. When I
heard my luckless fate I left the wood with what speed I might, and coming to a
harbour, not far from thence, I lighted on this ship. For my sins I climbed
therein. Then without oars or helm this boat ravished me from shore; so that I
know not where I have come, nor what is the name of this city. Fair lady, for
God's love, counsel me of your good grace, for I know not where to turn, nor
how to govern the ship."

The lady made answer, "Fair sir, willingly shall I give you such good counsel
as I may. This realm and city are the appanage of my husband. He is a right
rich lord, of high lineage, but old and very full of years. Also he is jealous
beyond all measure; therefore it is that I see you now. By reason of his
jealousy he has shut me fast between high walls, entered by one narrow door,
with an ancient priest to keep the key. May God requite him for his deed. Night
and day I am guarded in this prison, from whence I may never go forth, without
the knowledge of my lord. Here are my chamber and my chapel, and here I live,
with this, my maiden, to bear me company. If it pleases you to dwell here for a
little, till you may pass upon your way, right gladly we shall receive you, and
with a good heart we will tend your wound, till you are healed."
