When Gugemar heard this speech he rejoiced greatly. He thanked the lady with
many sweet words, and consented to sojourn in her hall awhile. He raised
himself upon his couch, and by the courtesy of the damsels left the ship.
Leaning heavily upon the lady, at the end he won to her maiden's chamber, where
there was a fair bed covered with a rich dossal of broidered silk, edged with
fur. When he was entered in this bed, the damsels came bearing clear water in
basins of gold, for the cleansing of his hurt. They stanched the blood with a
towel of fine linen, and bound the wound strictly, to his exceeding comfort. So
after the vesper meal was eaten, the lady departed to her own chamber, leaving
the knight in much ease and content.

Now Gugemar set his love so fondly upon the lady that he forgot his father's
house. He thought no more of the anguish of his hurt, because of another wound
that was beneath his breast. He tossed and sighed in his unrest, and prayed the
maiden of his service to depart, so that he might sleep a little. When the maid
was gone, Gugemar considered within himself whether he might seek the dame, to
know whether her heart was warmed by any ember of the flame that burned in his.
He turned it this way and that, and knew not what to do. This only was clear,
that if the lady refused to search his wound, death, for him, was sure and
speedy.

"Alas," said he, "what shall I do! Shall I go to my lady, and pray her pity on
the wretch who has none to give him counsel? If she refuse my prayer, because
of her hardness and pride, I shall know there is nought for me but to die in my
sorrow, or, at least, to go heavily all the days of my life."

Then he sighed, and in his sighing lighted on a better purpose; for he said
within himself that doubtless he was born to suffer, and that the best of him
was tears. All the long night he spent in vigil and groanings and watchfulness.
To himself he told over her words and her semblance. He remembered the eyes and
the fair mouth of his lady, and all the grace and the sweetness, which had
struck like a knife at his heart. Between his teeth he cried on her for pity,
and for a little more would have called her to his side. Ah, had he but known
the fever of the lady, and how terrible a lord to her was Love, how great had
been his joy and solace. His visage would have been the more sanguine, which
was now so pale of colour, because of the dolour that was his. But if the
knight was sick by reason of his love, the dame had small cause to boast
herself of health. The lady rose early from her bed, since she might not sleep.
She complained of her unrest, and of Love who rode her so hardly. The maiden,
who was of her company, saw clearly enough that all her lady's thoughts were
set upon the knight, who, for his healing, sojourned in the chamber. She did
not know whether his thoughts were given again to the dame. When, therefore,
the lady had entered in the chapel, the damsel went straightway to the knight.
He welcomed her gladly, and bade her be seated near the bed. Then he inquired,
"Friend, where now is my lady, and why did she rise so early from her bed?"

Having spoken so far, he became silent, and sighed.

"Sir," replied the maiden softly, "you love, and are discreet, but be not too
discreet therein. In such a love as yours there is nothing to be ashamed. He
who may win my lady's favour has every reason to be proud of his fortune.
Altogether seemly would be your friendship, for you are young, and she is
fair."
