The knight made answer to the maiden, "I am so fast in the snare, that I pray
the fowler to slay me, if she may not free me from the net. Counsel me, fair
sweet friend, if I may hope of kindness at her hand."

Then the maiden of her sweetness comforted the knight, and assured him of all
the good that she was able. So courteous and debonair was the maid.

When the lady had heard Mass, she hastened back to the chamber. She had not
forgotten her friend, and greatly she desired to know whether he was awake or
asleep, of whom her heart was fain. She bade her maiden to summon him to her
chamber, for she had a certain thing in her heart to show him at leisure, were
it for the joy or the sorrow of their days.

Gugemar saluted the lady, and the dame returned the knight his courtesy, but
their hearts were too fearful for speech. The knight dared ask nothing of his
lady, for reason that he was a stranger in a strange land, and was adread to
show her his love. But—as says the proverb—he who will not tell of his sore,
may not hope for balm to his hurt. Love is a privy wound within the heart, and
none knoweth of that bitterness but the heart alone. Love is an evil which may
last for a whole life long, because of man and his constant heart. Many there
be who make of Love a gibe and a jest, and with specious words defame him by
boastful tales. But theirs is not love. Rather it is folly and lightness, and
the tune of a merry song. But let him who has found a constant lover prize her
above rubies, and serve her with loyal service, being altogether at her will.
Gugemar loved in this fashion, and therefore Love came swiftly to his aid. Love
put words in his mouth, and courage in his heart, so that his hope might be
made plain.

"Lady," said he, "I die for your love. I am in fever because of my wound, and
if you care not to heal my hurt I would rather die. Fair friend, I pray you for
grace. Do not gainsay me with evil words."

The lady hearkened with a smile to Gugemar's speech. Right daintily and sweetly
she replied, "Friend, yea is not a word of two letters. I do not grant such a
prayer every day of the week, and must you have your gift so quickly?"

"Lady," cried he, "for God's sake pity me, and take it not amiss. She, who
loves lightly, may make her lover pray for long, so that she may hide how often
her feet have trodden the pathway with another friend. But the honest dame,
when she has once given her heart to a friend, will not deny his wish because
of pride. The rather she will find her pride in humbleness, and love him again
with the same love he has set on her. So they will be glad together, and since
none will have knowledge or hearing of the matter, they will rejoice in their
youth. Fair, sweet lady, be this thy pleasure?"

When the lady heard these words well she found them honest and true. Therefore
without further prayings and ado she granted Gugemar her love and her kiss.
Henceforward Gugemar lived greatly at his ease, for he had sight and speech of
his friend, and many a time she granted him her embrace and tenderness, as is
the wont of lovers when alone.

For a year and a half Gugemar dwelt with his lady, in solace and great delight.
Then Fortune turned her wheel, and in a trice cast those down, whose seat had
been so high. Thus it chanced to them, for they were spied upon and seen.
