Now will I show of that lady, whom Gugemar so fondly loved. By the counsel of a
certain baron the ancient King set his wife in prison. She was shut fast in a
tower of grey marble, where her days were bad, and her nights worse. No man
could make clear to you the great pain, the anguish and the dolour, that she
suffered in this tower, wherein, I protest, she died daily. Two years and more
she lay bound in prison, where warders came, but never joy or delight. Often
she thought upon her friend.

"Gugemar, dear lord, in an evil hour I saw you with my eyes. Better for me that
I die quickly, than endure longer my evil lot. Fair friend, if I could but win
to that coast whence you sailed, very swiftly would I fling myself in the sea,
and end my wretched life." When she had said these words she rose to her feet,
and coming to the door was amazed to find therein neither bolt nor key. She
issued forth, without challenge from sergeant or warder, and hastening to the
harbour, found there her lover's ship, made fast to that very rock, from which
she would cast her down. When she saw the barge she climbed thereon, but
presently bethought her that on this nave her friend had gone to perish in the
sea. At this thought she would have fled again to the shore, but her bones were
as water, and she fell upon the deck. So in sore travail and sorrow, the vessel
carried her across the waves, to a port of Brittany, guarded by a castle,
strong and very fair. Now the lord of this castle was named Meriadus. He was a
right warlike prince, and had made him ready to fight with the prince of a
country near by. He had risen very early in the morning, to send forth a great
company of spears, the more easily to ravage this neighbour's realm. Meriadus
looked forth from his window, and marked the ship which came to port. He
hastened down the steps of the perron, and calling to his chamberlain, came
with what speed he might to the nave. Then mounting the ladder he stood upon
the deck. When Meriadus found within the ship a dame, who for beauty seemed
rather a fay than a mere earthly woman, he seized her by her mantle, and
brought her swiftly to his keep. Right joyous was he because of his good
fortune, for lovely was the lady beyond mortal measure. He made no question as
to who had set her on the barge. He knew only that she was fair, and of high
lineage, and that his heart turned towards her with so hot a love as never
before had he put on dame or damsel. Now there dwelt within the castle a sister
of this lord, who was yet unwed. Meriadus bestowed the lady in his sister's
chamber, because it was the fairest in the tower. Moreover he commanded that
she should be meetly served, and held in all reverence. But though the dame was
so richly clothed and cherished, ever was she sad and deep in thought. Meriadus
came often to cheer her with mirth and speech, by reason that he wished to gain
her love as a free gift, and not by force. It was in vain that he prayed her
for grace, since she had no balm for his wound. For answer she showed him the
girdle about her body, saying that never would she give her love to man, save
only to him who might unloose the buckle of that girdle, without harm to belt
or clasp. When Meriadus heard these words, he spoke in haste and said,

"Lady, there dwells in this country a very worthy knight, who will take no
woman as wife, except she first untie a certain crafty knot in the hem of a
shirt, and that without force or knife. For a little I would wager that it was
you who tied this knot."

When the lady heard thereof her breath went from her, and near she came to
falling on the ground. Meriadus caught her in his arms, and cut the laces of
her bodice, that she might have the more air. He strove to unfasten her girdle,
but might not dissever the clasp. Yea, though every knight in the realm essayed
to unfasten that cincture, it would not yield, except to one alone.
