Now will I rehearse before you a very ancient Breton Lay. As the tale was told
to me, so, in turn, will I tell it over again, to the best of my art and
knowledge. Hearken now to my story, its why and its reason.

In Brittany there lived a knight, so courteous and so brave, that in all the
realm there was no worthier lord than he. This knight was named Eliduc. He had
wedded in his youth a noble lady of proud race and name. They had long dwelt
together in peace and content, for their hearts were fixed on one another in
faith and loyalty. Now it chanced that Eliduc sought his fortune in a far land,
where there was a great war. There he loved a Princess, the daughter of the
King and Queen of those parts. Guillardun was the maiden's name, and in all the
realm was none more fair. The wife of Eliduc had to name, Guildeluec, in her
own country. By reason of these two ladies their story is known as the Lay of
Guildeluec and Guillardun, but at first it was rightly called the Lay of
Eliduc. The name is a little matter; but if you hearken to me you shall learn
the story of these three lovers, in its pity and its truth.

Eliduc had as lord and suzerain, the King of Brittany over Sea. The knight was
greatly loved and cherished of his prince, by reason of his long and loyal
service. When the King's business took him from his realm, Eliduc was his
master's Justice and Seneschal. He governed the country well and wisely, and
held it from the foe with a strong hand. Nevertheless, in spite of all, much
evil was appointed unto him. Eliduc was a mighty hunter, and by the King's
grace, he would chase the stag within the woods. He was cunning and fair as
Tristan, and so wise in venery, that the oldest forester might not gainsay him
in aught concerning the shaw. But by reason of malice and envy, certain men
accused him to the King that he had meddled with the royal pleasaunce. The King
bade Eliduc to avoid his Court. He gave no reason for his commandment, and the
knight might learn nothing of the cause. Often he prayed the King that he might
know whereof he was accused. Often he begged his lord not to heed the specious
and crafty words of his foes. He called to mind the wounds he had gained in his
master's wars, but was answered never a word. When Eliduc found that he might
get no speech with his lord, it became his honour to depart. He returned to his
house, and calling his friends around him, opened out to them this business of
the King's wrath, in recompense for his faithful service.

"I did not reckon on a King's gratitude; but as the proverb says, it is useless
for a farmer to dispute with the horse in his plough. The wise and virtuous man
keeps faith to his lord, and bears goodwill to his neighbour, not for what he
may receive in return."

Then the knight told his friends that since he might no longer stay in his own
country, he should cross the sea to the realm of Logres, and sojourn there
awhile, for his solace. His fief he placed in the hands of his wife, and he
required of his men, and of all who held him dear, that they would serve her
loyally. Having given good counsel to the utmost of his power, the knight
prepared him for the road. Right heavy were his friends and kin, that he must
go forth from amongst them.
