Whilst the maiden lamented in this fashion, the chamberlain hastened to the
lodging of Eliduc. He came before the knight, and having saluted him in his
lady's name, he gave to his hand the ring and the girdle. The knight thanked
him earnestly for the gifts. He placed the ring upon his finger, and the girdle
he girt about his body. He said no more to the chamberlain, nor asked him any
questions; save only that he proffered him a gift. This the messenger might not
have, and returned the way he came. The chamberlain entered in the palace and
found the princess within her chamber. He greeted her on the part of the
knight, and thanked her for her bounty.

"Diva, diva," cried the lady hastily, "hide nothing from me; does he love me,
or does he not?"

"Lady," answered the chamberlain, "as I deem, he loves you, and truly. Eliduc
is no cozener with words. I hold him for a discreet and prudent gentleman, who
knows well how to hide what is in his heart. I gave him greeting in your name,
and granted him your gifts. He set the ring upon his finger, and as to your
girdle, he girt it upon him, and belted it tightly about his middle. I said no
more to him, nor he to me; but if he received not your gifts in tenderness, I
am the more deceived. Lady, I have told you his words: I cannot tell you his
thoughts. Only, mark carefully what I am about to say. If Eliduc had not a
richer gift to offer, he would not have taken your presents at my hand."

"It pleases you to jest," said the lady. "I know well that Eliduc does not
altogether hate me. Since my only fault is to cherish him too fondly, should he
hate me, he would indeed be blameworthy. Never again by you, or by any other,
will I require him of aught, or look to him for comfort. He shall see that a
maiden's love is no slight thing, lightly given, and lightly taken again—but,
perchance, he will not dwell in the realm so long as to know of the matter."

"Lady, the knight has covenanted to serve the King, in all loyalty, for the
space of a year. You have full leisure to tell, whatever you desire him to
learn."

When the maiden heard that Eliduc remained in the country, she rejoiced very
greatly. She was glad that the knight would sojourn awhile in her city, for she
knew naught of the torment he endured, since first he looked upon her. He had
neither peace nor delight, for he could not get her from his mind. He
reproached himself bitterly. He called to remembrance the covenant he made with
his wife, when he departed from his own land, that he would never be false to
his oath. But his heart was a captive now, in a very strong prison. He desired
greatly to be loyal and honest, but he could not deny his love for the
maiden—Guillardun, so frank and so fair.

Eliduc strove to act as his honour required. He had speech and sight of the
lady, and did not refuse her kiss and embrace. He never spoke of love, and was
diligent to offend in nothing. He was careful in this, because he would keep
faith with his wife, and would attempt no matter against his King. Very
grievously he pained himself, but at the end he might do no more. Eliduc caused
his horse to be saddled, and calling his companions about him, rode to the
castle to get audience of the King. He considered, too, that he might see his
lady, and learn what was in her heart. It was the hour of meat, and the King
having risen from table, had entered in his daughter's chamber. The King was at
chess, with a lord who had but come from over-sea. The lady sat near the board,
to watch the movements of the game. When Eliduc came before the prince, he
welcomed him gladly, bidding him to seat himself close at hand. Afterwards he
turned to his daughter, and said, "Princess, it becomes you to have a closer
friendship with this lord, and to treat him well and worshipfully. Amongst five
hundred, there is no better knight than he."
