Very sweetly made answer Sir Eliduc, for in honesty he loved honest maid, "Fair
friend, I have sworn faith to your father, and am his man. If I carried you
with me, I should give the lie to my troth. Let this covenant be made between
us. Should you give me leave to return to my own land I swear to you on my
honour as a knight, that I will come again on any day that you shall name. My
life is in your hands. Nothing on earth shall keep me from your side, so only
that I have life and health."

Then she, who loved so fondly, granted her knight permission to depart, and
fixed the term, and named the day for his return. Great was their sorrow that
the hour had come to bid farewell. They gave rings of gold for remembrance, and
sweetly kissed adieu. So they severed from each other's arms.

Eliduc sought the sea, and with a fair wind, crossed swiftly to the other side.
His lord was greatly content to learn the tidings of his knight's return. His
friends and his kinsfolk came to greet him, and the common folk welcomed him
very gladly. But, amongst them all, none was so blithe at his home-coming as
the fair and prudent lady who was his wife. Despite this show of friendship,
Eliduc was ever sad, and deep in thought. He went heavily, till he might look
upon his friend. He felt no happiness, nor made pretence of any, till he should
meet with her again. His wife was sick at heart, because of the coldness of her
husband. She took counsel with her soul, as to what she had done amiss. Often
she asked him privily, if she had come short or offended in any measure, whilst
he was without the realm. If she was accused by any, let him tell her the
accusation, that she might purge herself of the offence.

"Wife," answered Eliduc, "neither I, nor any other, charge you with aught that
is against your honour to do. The cause of my sorrow is in myself. I have
pledged my faith to the King of that country, from whence I come, that I will
return to help him in his need. When my lord the King has peace in his realm,
within eight days I shall be once more upon the sea. Great travail I must
endure, and many pains I shall suffer, in readiness for that hour. Return I
must, and till then I have no mind for anything but toil; for I will not give
the lie to my plighted word."

Eliduc put his fief once more in the hands of his dame. He sought his lord, and
aided him to the best of his might. By the counsel and prowess of the knight,
the King came again into his own. When the term appointed by his lady, and the
day she named for his return drew near, Eliduc wrought in such fashion that
peace was accorded between the foes. Then the knight made him ready for his
journey, and took thought to the folk he should carry with him. His choice fell
on two of his nephews, whom he loved very dearly, and on a certain chamberlain
of his household. These were trusted servitors, who were of his inmost mind,
and knew much of his counsel. Together with these went his squires, these only,
for Eliduc had no care to take many. All these, nephew and squire and
chamberlain, Eliduc made to promise, and confirm by an oath, that they would
reveal nothing of his business.
