The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been. He did not
think he discerned God in this manner of dying; let us say the whole, for these
petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest: he, who
on occasion, was so fond of laughing at "His Grace," was rather shocked at not
being addressed as Monseigneur, and he was almost tempted to retort "citizen."
He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity, common enough to doctors
and priests, but which was not habitual with him. This man, after all, this
member of the Convention, this representative of the people, had been one of
the powerful ones of the earth; for the first time in his life, probably, the
Bishop felt in a mood to be severe.  Meanwhile, the member of the Convention
had been surveying him with a modest cordiality, in which one could have
distinguished, possibly, that humility which is so fitting when one is on the
verge of returning to dust.  The Bishop, on his side, although he generally
restrained his curiosity, which, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could not
refrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attention which, as
it did not have its course in sympathy, would have served his conscience as a
matter of reproach, in connection with any other man. A member of the
Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the
law, even of the law of charity. G——, calm, his body almost upright, his voice
vibrating, was one of those octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment
to the physiologist. The Revolution had many of these men, proportioned to the
epoch. In this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof. Though so
near to his end, he preserved all the gestures of health. In his clear glance,
in his firm tone, in the robust movement of his shoulders, there was something
calculated to disconcert death. Azrael, the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre,
would have turned back, and thought that he had mistaken the door. G—— seemed
to be dying because he willed it so. There was freedom in his agony. His legs
alone were motionless. It was there that the shadows held him fast. His feet
were cold and dead, but his head survived with all the power of life, and
seemed full of light. 
