In the realm of Brittany stands a certain rich and mighty city, called Saint
Malo. There were citizens of this township two knights, so well spoken and
reputed of all, that the city drew therefrom great profit and fame. The houses
of these lords were very near the one to the other. One of the two knights had
to wife a passing fair lady, right gracious of manner and sweet of tongue.
Wondrous pleasure found this dame to array herself richly, after the wont and
fashion of her time. The other knight was yet a bachelor. He was well accounted
of amongst his fellows as a hardy knight and as an honourable man. He gave
hospitality gladly. Largely he gained, largely he spent, and willingly bestowed
gifts of all that he had.

This bachelor set his love upon his neighbour's wife. By reason of his urgent
prayers, his long suit and service, and by reason that all men spake naught of
him but praise—perchance, also, for reason that he was never far from her
eye—presently this lady came to set her heart on him again. Though these two
friends loved right tenderly, yet were they so private and careful in their
loves that none perceived what was in their hearts. No man pried on them, or
disturbed their goings and comings. These were the more easy to devise since
the bachelor and the lady were such near neighbours. Their two houses stood
side by side, hall and cellar and combles. Only between the gardens was built a
high and ancient wall, of worn gray stone. When the lady sat within her bower,
by leaning from the casement she and her friend might speak together, he to
her, and she to him. They could also throw messages in writing, and divers
pretty gifts, the one to the other. Little enough had they to displease them,
and greatly were they at their ease, save only that they might not take their
pleasure together, so often as their hearts had wished. For the dame was
guarded very straitly when her husband was abroad. Yet not so strictly but that
they might have word and speech, the now by night and now by day. At least,
however close the watch and ward, none might hinder that at times these fair
lovers stood within their casements, and looked fondly on the other's face.

Now after these friends had loved for a great space it chanced that the season
became warm and sweet. It was the time when meadow and copse are green; when
orchards grow white with bloom, and birds break into song as thickly as the
bush to flower. It is the season when he who loves would win to his desire.
Truly I tell you that the knight would have done all in his power to attain his
wish, and the lady, for her part, yearned for sight and speech of her friend.
At night, when the moon shone clearly in the sky, and her lord lay sleeping at
her side, often the dame slipped softly from her bed, and hastening to the
casement, leaned forth to have sight of him who watched. The greater part of
the dark they kept vigil together, for very pleasant it is to look upon your
friend, when sweeter things are denied.

This chanced so often, and the lady rose so frequently from her bed, that her
lord was altogether wrathful, and many a time inquired the reason of her
unrest.

"Husband," replied the dame, "there is no dearer joy in this world, than to
hear the nightingale sing. It is to hearken to the song that rises so sweetly
on the night, that I lean forth from the casement. What tune of harp or viol is
half so fair! Because of my delight in his song, and of my desire to hear, I
may not shut my eyes till it be morn."
