When the Maiden heard the words of him whom so fondly she desired to love, she
was altogether moved, and granted him forthwith her heart and her tenderness.
To her bounty she added another gift besides. Never might Launfal be desirous
of aught, but he would have according to his wish. He might waste and spend at
will and pleasure, but in his purse ever there was to spare. No more was
Launfal sad. Right merry was the pilgrim, since one had set him on the way,
with such a gift, that the more pennies he bestowed, the more silver and gold
were in his pouch.

But the Maiden had yet a word to say.

"Friend," she said, "hearken to my counsel. I lay this charge upon you, and
pray you urgently, that you tell not to any man the secret of our love. If you
show this matter, you will lose your friend, for ever and a day. Never again
may you see my face. Never again will you have seisin of that body, which is
now so tender in your eyes."

Launfal plighted faith, that right strictly he would observe this commandment.
So the Maiden granted him her kiss and her embrace, and very sweetly in that
fair lodging passed the day till evensong was come.

Right loath was Launfal to depart from the pavilion at the vesper hour, and
gladly would he have stayed, had he been able, and his lady wished.

"Fair friend," said she, "rise up, for no longer may you tarry. The hour is
come that we must part. But one thing I have to say before you go. When you
would speak with me I shall hasten to come before your wish. Well I deem that
you will only call your friend where she may be found without reproach or shame
of men. You may see me at your pleasure; my voice shall speak softly in your
ear at will; but I must never be known of your comrades, nor must they ever
learn my speech."

Right joyous was Launfal to hear this thing. He sealed the covenant with a
kiss, and stood upon his feet. Then there entered the two maidens who had led
him to the pavilion, bringing with them rich raiment, fitting for a knight's
apparel. When Launfal had clothed himself therewith, there seemed no goodlier
varlet under heaven, for certainly he was fair and true. After these maidens
had refreshed him with clear water, and dried his hands upon the napkin,
Launfal went to meat. His friend sat at table with him, and small will had he
to refuse her courtesy. Very serviceably the damsels bore the meats, and
Launfal and the Maiden ate and drank with mirth and content. But one dish was
more to the knight's relish than any other. Sweeter than the dainties within
his mouth, was the lady's kiss upon his lips.

When supper was ended, Launfal rose from table, for his horse stood waiting
without the pavilion. The destrier was newly saddled and bridled, and showed
proudly in his rich gay trappings. So Launfal kissed, and bade farewell, and
went his way. He rode back towards the city at a slow pace. Often he checked
his steed, and looked behind him, for he was filled with amazement, and all
bemused concerning this adventure. In his heart he doubted that it was but a
dream. He was altogether astonished, and knew not what to do. He feared that
pavilion and Maiden alike were from the realm of faery.
