Launfal returned to his lodging, and was greeted by servitors, clad no longer
in ragged raiment. He fared richly, lay softly, and spent largely, but never
knew how his purse was filled. There was no lord who had need of a lodging in
the town, but Launfal brought him to his hall, for refreshment and delight.
Launfal bestowed rich gifts. Launfal redeemed the poor captive. Launfal clothed
in scarlet the minstrel. Launfal gave honour where honour was due. Stranger and
friend alike he comforted at need. So, whether by night or by day, Launfal
lived greatly at his ease. His lady, she came at will and pleasure, and, for
the rest, all was added unto him.

Now it chanced, the same year, about the feast of St. John, a company of
knights came, for their solace, to an orchard, beneath that tower where dwelt
the Queen. Together with these lords went Gawain and his cousin, Yvain the
fair. Then said Gawain, that goodly knight, beloved and dear to all,

"Lords, we do wrong to disport ourselves in this pleasaunce without our comrade
Launfal. It is not well to slight a prince as brave as he is courteous, and of
a lineage prouder than our own."

Then certain of the lords returned to the city, and finding Launfal within his
hostel, entreated him to take his pastime with them in that fair meadow. The
Queen looked out from a window in her tower, she and three ladies of her
fellowship. They saw the lords at their pleasure, and Launfal also, whom well
they knew. So the Queen chose of her Court thirty damsels—the sweetest of face
and most dainty of fashion—and commanded that they should descend with her to
take their delight in the garden. When the knights beheld this gay company of
ladies come down the steps of the perron, they rejoiced beyond measure. They
hastened before to lead them by the hand, and said such words in their ear as
were seemly and pleasant to be spoken. Amongst these merry and courteous lords
hasted not Sir Launfal. He drew apart from the throng, for with him time went
heavily, till he might have clasp and greeting of his friend. The ladies of the
Queen's fellowship seemed but kitchen wenches to his sight, in comparison with
the loveliness of the maiden. When the Queen marked Launfal go aside, she went
his way, and seating herself upon the herb, called the knight before her. Then
she opened out her heart.

"Launfal, I have honoured you for long as a worthy knight, and have praised and
cherished you very dearly. You may receive a queen's whole love, if such be
your care. Be content: he to whom my heart is given, has small reason to
complain him of the alms."

"Lady," answered the knight, "grant me leave to go, for this grace is not for
me. I am the King's man, and dare not break my troth. Not for the highest lady
in the world, not even for her love, will I set this reproach upon my lord."

When the Queen heard this, she was full of wrath, and spoke many hot and bitter
words.

"Launfal," she cried, "well I know that you think little of woman and her love.
There are sins more black that a man may have upon his soul. Traitor you are,
and false. Right evil counsel gave they to my lord, who prayed him to suffer
you about his person. You remain only for his harm and loss."

Launfal was very dolent to hear this thing. He was not slow to take up the
Queen's glove, and in his haste spake words that he repented long, and with
tears.
