The Queen rose straightway to her feet, and fled to her chamber, weeping. Right
wrathful and heavy was she, because of the words that had besmirched her. She
lay sick upon her bed, from which, she said, she would never rise, till the
King had done her justice, and righted this bitter wrong. Now the King that day
had taken his pleasure within the woods. He returned from the chase towards
evening, and sought the chamber of the Queen. When the lady saw him, she sprang
from her bed, and kneeling at his feet, pleaded for grace and pity. Launfal—she
said—had shamed her, since he required her love. When she had put him by, very
foully had he reviled her, boasting that his love was already set on a lady, so
proud and noble, that her meanest wench went more richly, and smiled more
sweetly, than the Queen. Thereat the King waxed marvellously wrathful, and
swore a great oath that he would set Launfal within a fire, or hang him from a
tree, if he could not deny this thing, before his peers.

Arthur came forth from the Queen's chamber, and called to him three of his
lords. These he sent to seek the knight who so evilly had entreated the Queen.
Launfal, for his part, had returned to his lodging, in a sad and sorrowful
case. He saw very clearly that he had lost his friend, since he had declared
their love to men. Launfal sat within his chamber, sick and heavy of thought.
Often he called upon his friend, but the lady would not hear his voice. He
bewailed his evil lot, with tears; for grief he came nigh to swoon; a hundred
times he implored the Maiden that she would deign to speak with her knight.
Then, since the lady yet refrained from speech, Launfal cursed his hot and
unruly tongue. Very near he came to ending all this trouble with his knife.
Naught he found to do but to wring his hands, and call upon the Maiden, begging
her to forgive his trespass, and to talk with him again, as friend to friend.

But little peace is there for him who is harassed by a King. There came
presently to Launfal's hostel those three barons from the Court. These bade the
knight forthwith to go with them to Arthur's presence, to acquit him of this
wrong against the Queen. Launfal went forth, to his own deep sorrow. Had any
man slain him on the road, he would have counted him his friend. He stood
before the King, downcast and speechless, being dumb by reason of that great
grief, of which he showed the picture and image.

Arthur looked upon his captive very evilly.

"Vassal," said he, harshly, "you have done me a bitter wrong. It was a foul
deed to seek to shame me in this ugly fashion, and to smirch the honour of the
Queen. Is it folly or lightness which leads you to boast of that lady, the
least of whose maidens is fairer, and goes more richly, than the Queen?"

Launfal protested that never had he set such shame upon his lord. Word by word
he told the tale of how he denied the Queen, within the orchard. But concerning
that which he had spoken of the lady, he owned the truth, and his folly. The
love of which he bragged was now lost to him, by his own exceeding fault. He
cared little for his life, and was content to obey the judgment of the Court.
