The King held a high Court, and bade his great vassals and barons, and all the
lords of his venery to the feast. Never was there a goodlier feast, nor one set
forth with sweeter show and pomp. Amongst those who were bidden, came that same
knight who had the wife of Bisclavaret for dame. He came to the castle, richly
gowned, with a fair company, but little he deemed whom he would find so near.
Bisclavaret marked his foe the moment he stood within the hall. He ran towards
him, and seized him with his fangs, in the King's very presence, and to the
view of all. Doubtless he would have done him much mischief, had not the King
called and chidden him, and threatened him with a rod. Once, and twice, again,
the Wolf set upon the knight in the very light of day. All men marvelled at his
malice, for sweet and serviceable was the beast, and to that hour had shown
hatred of none. With one consent the household deemed that this deed was done
with full reason, and that the Wolf had suffered at the knight's hand some
bitter wrong. Right wary of his foe was the knight until the feast had ended,
and all the barons had taken farewell of their lord, and departed, each to his
own house. With these, amongst the very first, went that lord whom Bisclavaret
so fiercely had assailed. Small was the wonder that he was glad to go.

No long while after this adventure it came to pass that the courteous King
would hunt in that forest where Bisclavaret was found. With the prince came his
wolf, and a fair company. Now at nightfall the King abode within a certain
lodge of that country, and this was known of that dame who before was the wife
of Bisclavaret. In the morning the lady clothed her in her most dainty apparel,
and hastened to the lodge, since she desired to speak with the King, and to
offer him a rich present. When the lady entered in the chamber, neither man nor
leash might restrain the fury of the Wolf. He became as a mad dog in his hatred
and malice. Breaking from his bonds he sprang at the lady's face, and bit the
nose from her visage. From every side men ran to the succour of the dame. They
beat off the wolf from his prey, and for a little would have cut him in pieces
with their swords. But a certain wise counsellor said to the King,

"Sire, hearken now to me. This beast is always with you, and there is not one
of us all who has not known him for long. He goes in and out amongst us, nor
has molested any man, neither done wrong or felony to any, save only to this
dame, one only time as we have seen. He has done evil to this lady, and to that
knight, who is now the husband of the dame. Sire, she was once the wife of that
lord who was so close and private to your heart, but who went, and none might
find where he had gone. Now, therefore, put the dame in a sure place, and
question her straitly, so that she may tell—if perchance she knows thereof—for
what reason this Beast holds her in such mortal hate. For many a strange deed
has chanced, as well we know, in this marvellous land of Brittany."

The King listened to these words, and deemed the counsel good. He laid hands
upon the knight, and put the dame in surety in another place. He caused them to
be questioned right straitly, so that their torment was very grievous. At the
end, partly because of her distress, and partly by reason of her exceeding
fear, the lady's lips were loosed, and she told her tale. She showed them of
the betrayal of her lord, and how his raiment was stolen from the hollow stone.
Since then she knew not where he went, nor what had befallen him, for he had
never come again to his own land. Only, in her heart, well she deemed and was
persuaded, that Bisclavaret was he.

Straightway the King demanded the vesture of his baron, whether this were to
the wish of the lady, or whether it were against her wish. When the raiment was
brought him, he caused it to be spread before Bisclavaret, but the Wolf made as
though he had not seen. Then that cunning and crafty counsellor took the King
apart, that he might give him a fresh rede.
