The widow did according to her father's will. She kindled a fire, and taking
the babe, washed and cherished her in her need. Very certain she was, when she
saw that rich stuff of crimson samite, and the golden ring about the arm, that
the girl was come of an honourable race. The next day, when the office was
ended, the porter prayed the Abbess that he might have speech with her as she
left the church. He related his story, and told of the finding of the child.
The Abbess bade him to fetch the child, dressed in such fashion as she was
discovered in the ash. The porter returned to his. house, and showed the babe
right gladly to his dame. The Abbess observed the infant closely, and said that
she would be at the cost of her nourishing, and would cherish her as a sister's
child. She commanded the porter strictly to forget that he took her from the
ash. In this manner it chanced that the maiden was tended of the Abbess. The
lady considered the maid as her niece, and since she was taken from the ash,
gave her the name of Frêne. By this name she was known of all, within the Abbey
precincts, where she was nourished.

When Frêne came to that age in which a girl turns to woman, there was no fairer
maiden in Brittany, nor so sweet a damsel. Frank, she was, and open, but
discreet in semblance and in speech. To see her was to love her, and to prize
her smile above the beauty of the world. Now at Dol there lived a lord of whom
much good was spoken. I will tell you his name. The folk of his country called
him Buron. This lord heard speak of the maiden, and began to love her, for the
sweetness men told of her. As he rode home from some tournament, he passed near
the convent, and prayed the Abbess that he might look upon her niece. The
Abbess gave him his desire. Greatly was the maiden to his mind. Very fair he
found her, sweetly schooled and fashioned, modest and courteous to all. If he
might not win her to his love, he counted himself the more forlorn. This lord
was at his wits end, for he knew not what to do. If he repaired often to the
convent, the Abbess would consider of the cause of his comings, and he would
never again see the maiden with his eyes. One thing only gave him a little
hope. Should he endow the Abbey of his wealth, he would make it his debtor for
ever. In return he might ask a little room, where he might abide to have their
fellowship, and, at times, withdraw him from the world. This he did. He gave
richly of his goods to the Abbey. Often, in return, he went to the convent, but
for other reasons than for penitence and peace. He besought the maiden, and
with prayers and promises, persuaded her to set upon him her love. When this
lord was assured that she loved him, on a certain day he reasoned with her in
this manner.

"Fair friend," said he, "since you have given me your love, come with me, where
I can cherish you before all the world. You know, as well as I, that if your
aunt should perceive our friendship, she would be passing wrath, and grieve
beyond measure. If my counsel seems good, let us flee together, you with me,
and I with you. Certes, you shall never have cause to regret your trust, and of
my riches you shall have the half."

When she who loved so fondly heard these words, she granted of her tenderness
what it pleased him to have, and followed after where he would. Frêne fled to
her lover's castle, carrying with her that silken cloth and ring, which might
do her service on a day. These the Abbess had given her again, telling her how
one morning at prime she was found upon an ash, this ring and samite her only
wealth, since she was not her niece. Right carefully had Frêne guarded her
treasure from that hour. She shut them closely in a little chest, and this
coffret she bore with her in her flight, for she would neither lose them nor
forget.
