He knew again his town, and his master's house, and descended to the ground at
Milon's very feet. Milon rejoiced greatly when he marked his own. He caught the
bird by his wings, and crying for his steward, bade him give the swan to eat.
The knight removed the missive from the messenger's neck. He glanced from head
to head of the letter, seeking the means that he hoped to find, and the
salutation he so tenderly wished. Sweet to his heart was the writing, for the
lady wrote that without him there was no joy in her life, and since it was his
desire to hear by the swan, it would be her pleasure also.

For twenty years the swan was made the messenger of these two lovers, who might
never win together. There was no speech between them, save that carried by the
bird. They caused the swan to fast for three days, and then sent him on his
errand. He to whom the letter came, saw to it that the messenger was fed to
heart's desire. Many a time the swan went upon his journey, for however
strictly the lady was held of her husband, there was none who had suspicion of
a bird.

The dame beyond the Humber nourished and tended the boy committed to her charge
with the greatest care. When he was come to a fitting age she made him to be
knighted of her lord, for goodly and serviceable was the lad. On the same day
the aunt read over to him the letter, and put in his hand the ring. She told
him the name of his mother, and his father's story. In all the world there was
no worthier knight, nor a more chivalrous and gallant gentleman. The lad
hearkened diligently to the lady's tale. He rejoiced greatly to hear of his
father's prowess, and was proud beyond measure of his renown. He considered
within himself, saying to his own heart, that much should be required of his
father's son, and that he would not be worthy of his blood if he did not
endeavour to merit his name. He determined therefore that he would leave his
country, and seek adventure as a knight errant, beyond the sea. The varlet
delayed no longer than the evening. On the morrow he bade farewell to his aunt,
who having warned and admonished him for his good, gave him largely of her
wealth, to bring him on his way. He rode to Southampton, that he might find a
ship equipped for sea, and so came to Barfleur. Without any tarrying the lad
went straight to Brittany, where he spent his money and himself in feasts and
in tourneys. The rich men of the land were glad of his friendship, for there
was none who bore himself better in the press with spear or with sword. What he
took from the rich he bestowed on such knights as were poor and luckless. These
loved him greatly, since he gained largely and spent freely, granting of his
wealth to all. Wherever this knight sojourned in the realm he bore away the
prize. So debonair was he and chivalrous that his fame and praise crossed the
water, and were noised abroad in his own land. Folk told how a certain knight
from beyond the Humber, who had passed the sea in quest of wealth and honour,
had so done, that by reason of his prowess, his liberality, and his modesty,
men called him the Knight Peerless, since they did not know his name.

This praise of the good knight, and of his deeds, came to be heard of Milon.
Very dolent was he and sorely troubled that so young a knight should be
esteemed above his fathers. He marvelled greatly that the stout spears of the
past had not put on their harness and broken a lance for their ancient honour.
One thing he determined, that he would cross the sea without delay, so that he
might joust with the dansellon, and abate his pride. In wrath and anger he
purposed to fight, to beat his adversary from the saddle, and bring him at last
to shame. After this was ended he would seek his son, of whom he had heard
nothing, since he had gone from his aunt's castle. Milon caused his friend to
know of his wishes. He opened out to her all his thought, and craved her
permission to depart. This letter he sent by the swan, commending the bird to
her care.
