This ship was wont to traffic with the Saracens in their country, so the
sailors rowed towards the barrel, and partly by cunning and partly by strength,
at the last got it safely upon the deck. The merchants looked long at the cask.
They wondered greatly what it could be, and wondering, they saw that the head
of the barrel was newly closed. They opened the cask, and found therein a woman
at the point of death, for air had failed her. Her body was gross, her visage
swollen, and the eyes started horribly from her head. When she breathed the
fresh air and felt the wind blow upon her, she sighed a little, so that the
merchants standing by, spoke comfortably to her, but she might not answer them
a word. In the end, heart and speech came again to her. She spoke to the
chapmen and the sailors who pressed about her, and much she marvelled how she
found herself amongst them. When she perceived that she was with merchants and
Christian men she was the more easy, and fervently she praised Jesus Christ in
her heart, thanking Him for the loving kindness which had kept her from death.
For this lady was altogether contrite in heart, and earnestly desired to amend
her life towards God, repenting the trespass she had done to others, and
fearing the judgment that was rightly her due. The merchants inquired of the
lady whence she came, and she told them the truth, saying that she was a
miserable wretch and a poor sinner, as they could see for themselves. She
related the cruel adventure which had chanced to her, and prayed them to take
pity on a most unhappy lady, and they answered that mercy they would show. So
with meat and drink her former beauty came to her again.

Now this merchant ship fared so far that she came to the land of the Paynims,
and cast anchor in the port of Aumarie. Galleys of these Saracens came to know
their business, and they answered that they were traffickers in divers
merchandise in many a realm. They showed them also the safe conduct they
carried of princes and mighty lords that they might pass in safety through
their countries to buy and sell their goods. The merchants got them to land in
this port, taking the lady with them. They sought counsel one of the other to
know what it were best to do with her. One was for selling her as a slave, but
his companion proposed to give her as a sop to the rich Soudan of Aumarie, that
their business should be the less hindered. To this they all agreed. They
arrayed the lady freshly in broidered raiment, and carried her before the
Soudan, who was a lusty young man. He accepted their gift, receiving the lady
with a right glad heart, for she was passing fair. The Soudan inquired of them
as to who she was.

"Sire," answered the merchants, "we know no more than you, but marvellous was
the fashion in which she came to our hands."

The gift was so greatly to the Soudan's mind that he served the chapmen to the
utmost of his power. He loved the lady very tenderly, and entreated her in all
honour. He held and tended her so well, that her sweet colour came again to
her, and her beauty increased beyond measure. The Soudan sought to know by
those who had the gift of tongues as to the lady's home and race, but these she
would not reveal to any. He was the more thoughtful therefore, because he might
see that she was a dame of birth and lineage. He inquired of her as to whether
she were a Christian woman, promising that if she would deny her faith, he
would take her as his wife, since he was yet unwed. The lady saw clearly that
it were better to be converted by love than perforce; so she answered that her
religion was to do her master's pleasure. When she had renounced her faith, and
rejected the Christian law, the Soudan made her his dame according to the use
and wont of this country of the Paynim. He held her very dear, cherishing her
in all honour, for his love waxed deeper as the days wore on.
