Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit, his hour of
bitterness, his cloud. The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this
grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things. Certainly, such a man
would have done well not to entertain any political opinions. Let there be no
mistake as to our meaning: we are not confounding what is called "political
opinions" with the grand aspiration for progress, with the sublime faith,
patriotic, democratic, humane, which in our day should be the very foundation
of every generous intellect. Without going deeply into questions which are only
indirectly connected with the subject of this book, we will simply say this: It
would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist, and if
his glance had never been, for a single instant, turned away from that serene
contemplation in which is distinctly discernible, above the fictions and the
hatreds of this world, above the stormy vicissitudes of human things, the
beaming of those three pure radiances, truth, justice, and charity.  While
admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur
Welcome, we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right
and liberty, his proud opposition, his just but perilous resistance to the
all-powerful Napoleon. But that which pleases us in people who are rising
pleases us less in the case of people who are falling. We only love the fray so
long as there is danger, and in any case, the combatants of the first hour have
alone the right to be the exterminators of the last. He who has not been a
stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin. The
denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall. As for
us, when Providence intervenes and strikes, we let it work. 1812 commenced to
disarm us. In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn legislative
body, emboldened by catastrophe, possessed only traits which aroused
indignation. And it was a crime to applaud, in 1814, in the presence of those
marshals who betrayed; in the presence of that senate which passed from one
dunghill to another, insulting after having deified; in the presence of that
idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol,—it was a duty
to turn aside the head. In 1815, when the supreme disasters filled the air,
when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach, when Waterloo
could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon, the mournful acclamation of
the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in
it, and, after making all allowance for the despot, a heart like that of the
Bishop of D——, ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and
touching features presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on
the brink of the abyss.
