Thus, within the space of twenty-four hours, all the threads of the plot had
been unraveled, thanks to the really unforeseen clues supplied by a schoolboy
of seventeen. In twenty-four hours, what had seemed inexplicable became simple
and clear. In twenty-four hours, the scheme devised by the accomplices to save
their leader was baffled; the capture of Arsene Lupin, wounded and dying, was
no longer in doubt, his gang was disorganized, the address of his establishment
in Paris and the name which he assumed were known and, for the first time, one
of his cleverest and most carefully elaborated feats was seen through before he
had been able to ensure its complete execution.

An immense clamor of astonishment, admiration and curiosity arose among the
public. Already, the Rouen journalist, in a very able article, had described
the first examination of the sixth-form pupil, laying stress upon his personal
charm, his simplicity of manner and his quiet assurance. The indiscretions of
Ganimard and M. Filleul, indiscretions to which they yielded in spite of
themselves, under an impulse that proved stronger than their professional
pride, suddenly enlightened the public as to the part played by Isidore
Beautrelet in recent events. He alone had done everything. To him alone the
merit of the victory was due.

The excitement was intense. Isidore Beautrelet awoke to find himself a hero;
and the crowd, suddenly infatuated, insisted upon the fullest information
regarding its new favorite. The reporters were there to supply it. They rushed
to the assault of the Lycee Janson-de-Sailly, waited for the day-boarders to
come out after schoolhours and picked up all that related, however remotely, to
Beautrelet. It was in this way that they learned the reputation which he
enjoyed among his schoolfellows, who called him the rival of Holmlock Shears.
Thanks to his powers of logical reasoning, with no further data than those
which he was able to gather from the papers, he had, time after time,
proclaimed the solution of very complicated cases long before they were cleared
up by the police.

It had become a game at the Lycee Janson to put difficult questions and
intricate problems to Beautrelet; and it was astonishing to see with what
unhesitating and analytical power and by means of what ingenious deductions he
made his way through the thickest darkness. Ten days before the arrest of
Jorisse, the grocer, he showed what could be done with the famous umbrella. In
the same way, he declared from the beginning, in the matter of the Saint-Cloud
mystery, that the concierge was the only possible murderer.
