It contained a profound study of each of the exploits of Arsene Lupin, throwing
the illustrious burglar's operations into extraordinary relief, showing the
very mechanism of his way of setting to work, his special tactics, his letters
to the press, his threats, the announcement of his thefts, in short, the whole
bag of tricks which he employed to bamboozle his selected victim and throw him
into such a state of mind that the victim almost offered himself to the plot
contrived against him and that everything took place, as it were, with his own
consent.

And the work was so just, regarded as a piece of criticism, so penetrating, so
lively and marked by a wit so clever and, at the same time, so cruel that the
lawyers at once passed over to his side, that the sympathy of the crowd was
summarily transferred from Lupin to Beautrelet and that, in the struggle
engaged upon between the two, the schoolboy's victory was loudly proclaimed in
advance.

Be this as it may, both M. Filleul and the Paris public prosecutor seemed
jealously to reserve the possibility of this victory for him. On the one hand,
they failed to establish Mr. Harlington's identity or to furnish a definite
proof of his connection with Lupin's gang. Confederate or not, he preserved an
obstinate silence. Nay, more, after examining his handwriting, it was
impossible to declare that he was the author of the intercepted letter. A Mr.
Harlington, carrying a small portmanteau and a pocket-book stuffed with
bank-notes, had taken up his abode at the Grand Hotel: that was all that could
be stated with certainty.

On the other hand, at Dieppe, M. Filleul lay down on the positions which
Beautrelet had won for him. He did not move a step forward. Around the
individual whom Mlle. de Saint-Veran had taken for Beautrelet, on the eve of
the crime, the same mystery reigned as heretofore. The same obscurity also
surrounded everything connected with the removal of the four Rubens pictures.
What had become of them? And what road had been taken by the motor car in which
they were carried off during the night?

Evidence of its passing was obtained at Luneray at Yerville, at Yvetot and at
Caudebec-en-Caux, where it must have crossed the Seine at daybreak in the
steam-ferry. But, when the matter came to be inquired into more thoroughly, it
was stated that the motor car was an uncovered one and that it would have been
impossible to pack four large pictures into it unobserved by the ferryman.

It was very probably the same car; but then the question cropped up again: what
had become of the four Rubenses?

These were so many problems which M. Filleul unanswered. Every day, his
subordinates searched the quadrilateral of the ruins. Almost every day, he came
to direct the explorations. But between that and discovering the refuge in
which Lupin lay dying—if it were true that Beautrelet's opinion was
correct—there was a gulf fixed which the worthy magistrate did not seem likely
to cross.

And so it was natural that they should turn once more to Isidore Beautrelet, as
he alone had succeeded in dispelling shadows which, in his absence, gathered
thicker and more impenetrable than ever. Why did he not go on with the case?
Seeing how far he had carried it, he required but an effort to succeed.
