One evening, five weeks later, I had given my man leave to go out. It was the
day before the 14th of July. The night was hot, a storm threatened and I felt
no inclination to leave the flat. I opened wide the glass doors leading to my
balcony, lit my reading lamp and sat down in an easy-chair to look through the
papers, which I had not yet seen.

It goes without saying that there was something about Arsene Lupin in all of
them. Since the attempt at murder of which poor Isidore Beautrelet had been the
victim, not a day had passed without some mention of the Ambrumesy mystery. It
had a permanent headline devoted to it. Never had public opinion been excited
to that extent, thanks to the extraordinary series of hurried events, of
unexpected and disconcerting surprises. M. Filleul, who was certainly accepting
the secondary part allotted to him with a good faith worthy of all praise, had
let the interviewers into the secret of his young advisor's exploits during the
memorable three days, so that the public was able to indulge in the rashest
suppositions. And the public gave itself free scope. Specialists and experts in
crime, novelists and playwrights, retired magistrates and chief-detectives,
erstwhile Lecocqs and budding Holmlock Shearses, each had his theory and
expounded it in lengthy contributions to the press. Everybody corrected and
supplemented the inquiry of the examining magistrate; and all on the word of a
child, on the word of Isidore Beautrelet, a sixth-form schoolboy at the Lycee
Janson-de-Sailly!

For really, it had to be admitted, the complete elements of the truth were now
in everybody's possession. What did the mystery consist of? They knew the
hiding-place where Arsene Lupin had taken refuge and lain a-dying; there was no
doubt about it: Dr. Delattre, who continued to plead professional secrecy and
refused to give evidence, nevertheless confessed to his intimate friends—who
lost no time in blabbing—that he really had been taken to a crypt to attend a
wounded man whom his confederates introduced to him by the name of Arsene
Lupin. And, as the corpse of Etienne de Vaudreix was found in that same crypt
and as the said Etienne de Vaudreix was none other than Arsene Lupin—as the
official examination went to show—all this provided an additional proof, if one
were needed, of the identity of Arsene Lupin and the wounded man. Therefore,
with Lupin dead and Mlle. de Saint-Veran's body recognized by the curb-bracelet
on her wrist, the tragedy was finished.

It was not. Nobody thought that it was, because Beautrelet had said the
contrary. Nobody knew in what respect it was not finished, but, on the word of
the young man, the mystery remained complete. The evidence of the senses did
not prevail against the statement of a Beautrelet. There was something which
people did not know, and of that something they were convinced that he was in
position to supply a triumphant explanation.

It is easy, therefore, to imagine the anxiety with which, at first, people
awaited the bulletins issued by the two Dieppe doctors to whose care the Comte
de Gesvres entrusted his patient; the distress that prevailed during the first
few days, when his life was thought to be in danger; and the enthusiasm of the
morning when the newspapers announced that there was no further cause for fear.
The least details excited the crowd. People wept at the thought of Beautrelet
nursed by his old father, who had been hurriedly summoned by telegram, and they
also admired the devotion of Mlle. Suzanne de Gesvres, who spent night after
night by the wounded lad's bedside.
