Next came a swift and glad convalescence. At last, the public were about to
know! They would know what Beautrelet had promised to reveal to M. Filleul and
the decisive words which the knife of the would-be assassin had prevented him
from uttering! And they would also know everything, outside the tragedy itself,
that remained impenetrable or inaccessible to the efforts of the police.

With Beautrelet free and cured of his wound, one could hope for some certainty
regarding Harlington, Arsene Lupin's mysterious accomplice, who was still
detained at the Sante prison. One would learn what had become, after the crime,
of Bredoux the clerk, that other accomplice, whose daring was really
terrifying.

With Beautrelet free, one could also form a precise idea concerning the
disappearance of Ganimard and the kidnapping of Shears. How was it possible for
two attempts of this kind to take place? Neither the English detectives nor
their French colleagues possessed the slightest clue on the subject. On
Whit-Sunday, Ganimard did not come home, nor on the Monday either, nor during
the five weeks that followed. In London, on Whit-Monday, Holmlock Shears took a
cab at eight o'clock in the evening to drive to the station. He had hardly
stepped in, when he tried to alight, probably feeling a presentiment of danger.
But two men jumped into the hansom, one on either side, flung him back on the
seat and kept him there between them, or rather under them. All this happened
in sight of nine or ten witnesses, who had no time to interfere. The cab drove
off at a gallop. And, after that, nothing. Nobody knew anything.

Perhaps, also, Beautrelet would be able to give the complete explanation of the
document, the mysterious paper to which. Bredoux, the magistrate's clerk,
attached enough importance to recover it, with blows of the knife, from the
person in whose possession it was. The problem of the Hollow Needle it was
called, by the countless solvers of riddles who, with their eyes bent upon the
figures and dots, strove to read a meaning into them. The Hollow Needle! What a
bewildering conjunction of two simple words! What an incomprehensible question
was set by that scrap of paper, whose very origin and manufacture were unknown!
The Hollow Needle! Was it a meaningless expression, the puzzle of a schoolboy
scribbling with pen and ink on the corner of a page? Or were they two magic
words which could compel the whole great adventure of Lupin the great
adventurer to assume its true significance? Nobody knew.

But the public soon would know. For some days, the papers had been announcing
the approaching arrival of Beautrelet. The struggle was on the point of
recommencing; and, this time, it would be implacable on the part of the young
man, who was burning to take his revenge. And, as it happened, my attention,
just then, was drawn to his name, printed in capitals. The Grand Journal headed
its front page with the following paragraph:
