"At any rate, you understand the first word," said Lupin, "the first word of
the telegram—that is to say, the name of the place from which it was
sent—look—'Cherbourg.'"

"Yes—yes," stammered Beautrelet. "Yes—I understand—'Cherbourg'-and then?"

"And then?—I should think the rest is quite plain: 'Removal of luggage
finished. Friends left with it and will wait instructions till eight morning.
All well.' Is there anything there that seems obscure? The word 'luggage'?
Pooh, you wouldn't have them write 'M. Beautrelet, senior'! What then? The way
in which the operation was performed? The miracle by which your father was
taken out of Cherbourg Arsenal, in spite of his twenty body-guards? Pooh, it's
as easy as A B C! And the fact remains that the luggage has been dispatched.
What do you say to that, baby?"

With all his tense being, with all his exasperated energy, Isidore tried to
preserve a good countenance. But I saw his lips quiver, his jaw shrink, his
eyes vainly strive to fix upon a point. He lisped a few words, then was silent
and, suddenly, gave way and, with his hands before his face, burst into loud
sobs:

"Oh, father! Father!"

An unexpected result, which was certainly the collapse which Lupin's pride
demanded, but also something more, something infinitely touching and infinitely
artless. Lupin gave a movement of annoyance and took up his hat, as though this
unaccustomed display of sentiment were too much for him. But, on reaching the
door, he stopped, hesitated and then returned, slowly, step by step.

The soft sound of the sobs rose like the sad wailing of a little child overcome
with grief. The lad's shoulders marked the heart-rending rhythm. Tears appeared
through the crossed fingers. Lupin leaned forward and, without touching
Beautrelet, said, in a voice that had not the least tone of pleasantry, nor
even of the offensive pity of the victor:

"Don't cry, youngster. This is one of those blows which a man must expect when
he rushes headlong into the fray, as you did. The worst disasters lie in wait
for him. The destiny of fighters will have it so. We must suffer it as bravely
as we can." Then, with a sort of gentleness, he continued, "You were right, you
see: we are not enemies. I have known it for long. From the very first, I felt
for you, for the intelligent creature that you are, an involuntary sympathy—and
admiration. And that is why I wanted to say this to you—don't be offended,
whatever you do: I should be extremely sorry to offend you—but I must say it:
well, give up struggling against me. I am not saying this out of vanity—nor
because I despise you—but, you see, the struggle is too unequal. You do not
know—nobody knows all the resources which I have at my command. Look here, this
secret of the Hollow Needle which you are trying so vainly to unravel: suppose,
for a moment, that it is a formidable, inexhaustible treasure—or else an
invisible, prodigious, fantastic refuge—or both perhaps. Think of the
superhuman power which I must derive from it! And you do not know, either, all
the resources which I have within myself—all that my will and my imagination
enable me to undertake and to undertake successfully. Only think that my whole
life—ever since I was born, I might almost say—has tended toward the same aim,
that I worked like a convict before becoming what I am and to realize, in its
perfection, the type which I wished to create—which I have succeeded in
creating. That being so—what can you do? At that very moment when you think
that victory lies within your grasp, it will escape you—there will be something
of which you have not thought—a trifle—a grain of sand which I shall have put
in the right place, unknown to you. I entreat you, give up—I should be obliged
to hurt you; and the thought distresses me." And, placing his hand on the boy's
forehead, he repeated, "Once more, youngster, give up. I should only hurt you.
Who knows if the trap into which you will inevitably fall has not already
opened under your footsteps?"
