I do not intend in these few sentences to set out in detail the mental
processes and the investigations that have enabled me to reconstruct the
tragedy—I should say the twofold tragedy—of Ambrumesy. In my opinion, this sort
of work and the judgments which it entails, deductions, inductions, analyses
and so on, are only interesting in a minor degree and, in any case, are highly
commonplace. No, I shall content myself with setting forth the two leading
ideas which I followed; and, if I do that, it will be seen that, in so setting
them forth and in solving the two problems which they raise, I shall have told
the story just as it happened, in the exact order of the different incidents.

It may be said that some of these incidents are not proved and that I leave too
large a field to conjecture. That is quite true. But, in my view, my theory is
founded upon a sufficiently large number of proved facts to be able to say that
even those facts which are not proved must follow from the strict logic of
events. The stream is so often lost under the pebbly bed: it is nevertheless
the same stream that reappears at intervals and mirrors back the blue sky.

The first riddle that confronted me, a riddle not in detail, but as a whole,
was how came it that Lupin, mortally wounded, one might say, managed to live
for five or six weeks without nursing, medicine or food, at the bottom of a
dark hole?

Let us start at the beginning. On Thursday the sixteenth of April, at four
o'clock in the morning, Arsene Lupin, surprised in the middle of one of his
most daring burglaries, runs away by the path leading to the ruins and drops
down shot. He drags himself painfully along, falls again and picks himself up
in the desperate hope of reaching the chapel. The chapel contains a crypt, the
existence of which he has discovered by accident. If he can burrow there, he
may be saved. By dint of an effort, he approaches it, he is but a few yards
away, when a sound of footsteps approaches. Harassed and lost, he lets himself
go. The enemy arrives. It is Mlle. Raymonde de Saint-Veran.

This is the prologue or rather the first scene of the drama.

What happened between them? This is the easier to guess inasmuch as the sequel
of the adventure gives us all the necessary clues. At the girl's feet lies a
wounded man, exhausted by suffering, who will be captured in two minutes. THIS
MAN HAS BEEN WOUNDED BY HERSELF. Will she also give him up?

If he is Jean Daval's murderer, yes, she will let destiny take its course. But,
in quick sentences, he tells her the truth about this awful murder committed by
her uncle, M. de Gesvres. She believes him. What will she do?

Nobody can see them. The footman Victor is watching the little door. The other,
Albert, posted at the drawing-room window, has lost sight of both of them. Will
she give up the man she has wounded?

The girl is carried away by a movement of irresistible pity, which any woman
will understand. Instructed by Lupin, with a few movements she binds up the
wound with his handkerchief, to avoid the marks which the blood would leave.
Then, with the aid of the key which he gives her, she opens the door of the
chapel. He enters, supported by the girl. She locks the door again and walks
away. Albert arrives.
