If the chapel had been visited at that moment or at least during the next few
minutes, before Lupin had had time to recover his strength, to raise the
flagstone and disappear by the stairs leading to the crypt, he would have been
taken. But this visit did not take place until six hours later and then only in
the most superficial way. As it is, Lupin is saved; and saved by whom? By the
girl who very nearly killed him.

Thenceforth, whether she wishes it or no, Mlle. de Saint-Veran is his
accomplice. Not only is she no longer able to give him up, but she is obliged
to continue her work, else the wounded man will perish in the shelter in which
she has helped to conceal him. Therefore she continues.

For that matter, if her feminine instinct makes the task a compulsory one, it
also makes it easy. She is full of artifice, she foresees and forestalls
everything. It is she who gives the examining magistrate a false description of
Arsene Lupin (the reader will remember the difference of opinion on this
subject between the cousins). It is she, obviously, who, thanks to certain
signs which I do not know of, suspects an accomplice of Lupin's in the driver
of the fly. She warns him. She informs him of the urgent need of an operation.
It is she, no doubt, who substitutes one cap for the other. It is she who
causes the famous letter to be written in which she is personally threatened.
How, after that, is it possible to suspect her?

It is she, who at that moment when I was about to confide my first impressions
to the examining magistrate, pretends to have seen me, the day before, in the
copsewood, alarms M. Filleul on my score and reduces me to silence: a dangerous
move, no doubt, because it arouses my attention and directs it against the
person who assails me with an accusation which I know to be false; but an
efficacious move, because the most important thing of all is to gain time and
close my lips.

Lastly, it is she who, during forty days, feeds Lupin, brings him his medicine
(the chemist at Ouville will produce the prescriptions which he made up for
Mlle. de Saint-Veran), nurses him, dresses his wound, watches over him AND
CURES HIM.

Here we have the first of our two problems solved, at the same time that the
Ambrumesy mystery is set forth. Arsene Lupin found, close at hand, in the
chateau itself, the assistance which was indispensable to him in order, first,
not to be discovered and, secondly, to live.

He now lives. And we come to the second problem, corresponding with the second
Ambrumesy mystery, the study of which served me as a conducting medium. Why
does Lupin, alive, free, at the head of his gang, omnipotent as before, why
does Lupin make desperate efforts, efforts with which I am constantly coming
into collision, to force the idea of his death upon the police and the public?

We must remember that Mlle. de Saint-Veran was a very pretty girl. The
photographs reproduced in the papers after her disappearance give but an
imperfect notion of her beauty. That follows which was bound to follow. Lupin,
seeing this lovely girl daily for five or six weeks, longing for her presence
when she is not there, subjected to her charm and grace when she is there,
inhaling the cool perfume of her breath when she bends over him, Lupin becomes
enamored of his nurse. Gratitude turns to love, admiration to passion. She is
his salvation, but she is also the joy of his eyes, the dream of his lonely
hours, his light, his hope, his very life.
