He respects her sufficiently not to take advantage of the girl's devotion and
not to make use of her to direct his confederates. There is, in fact, a certain
lack of decision apparent in the acts of the gang. But he loves her also, his
scruples weaken and, as Mlle. de Saint-Veran refuses to be touched by a love
that offends her, as she relaxes her visits when they become less necessary, as
she ceases them entirely on the day when he is cured—desperate, maddened by
grief, he takes a terrible resolve. He leaves his lair, prepares his stroke
and, on Saturday the sixth of June, assisted by his accomplices, he carries off
the girl.

This is not all. The abduction must not be known. All search, all surmises, all
hope, even, must be cut short. Mlle. de Saint-Veran must pass for dead. There
is a mock murder: proofs are supplied for the police inquiries. There is doubt
about the crime, a crime, for that matter, not unexpected, a crime foretold by
the accomplices, a crime perpetrated to revenge the chief's death. And, through
this very fact—observe the marvelous ingenuity of the conception—through this
very fact, the belief in this death is, so to speak, stimulated.

It is not enough to suggest a belief; it is necessary to compel a certainty.
Lupin foresees my interference. I am sure to guess the trickery of the chapel.
I am sure to discover the crypt. And, as the crypt will be empty, the whole
scaffolding will come to the ground.

THE CRYPT SHALL NOT BE EMPTY.

In the same way, the death of Mlle. de Saint-Veran will not be definite, unless
the sea gives up her corpse.

THE SEA SHALL GIVE UP THE CORPSE OF MLLE. DE SAINT-VERAN.

The difficulty is tremendous. The double obstacle seems insurmountable. Yes, to
any one but Lupin, but not to Lupin.

As he had foreseen, I guess the trickery of the chapel, I discover the crypt
and I go down into the lair where Lupin has taken refuge. His corpse is there!

Any person who had admitted the death of Lupin as possible would have been
baffled. But I had not admitted this eventuality for an instant (first, by
intuition and, secondly, by reasoning). Pretense thereupon became useless and
every scheme vain. I said to myself at once that the block of stone disturbed
by the pickaxe had been placed there with a very curious exactness, that the
least knock was bound to make it fall and that, in falling, it must inevitably
reduce the head of the false Arsene Lupin to pulp, in such a way as to make it
utterly irrecognizable.

Another discovery: half an hour later, I hear that the body of Mlle. de
Saint-Veran has been found on the rocks at Dieppe—or rather a body which is
considered to be Mlle. de Saint-Veran's, for the reason that the arm has a
bracelet similar to one of that young lady's bracelets. This, however, is the
only mark of identity, for the corpse is irrecognizable.

Thereupon I remember and I understand. A few days earlier, I happened to read
in a number of the Vigie de Dieppe that a young American couple staying at
Envermeu had committed suicide by taking poison and that their bodies had
disappeared on the very night of the death. I hasten to Envermeu. The story is
true, I am told, except in so far as concerns the disappearance, because the
brothers of the victims came to claim the corpses and took them away after the
usual formalities. The name of these brothers, no doubt, was Arsene Lupin & Co.
