These words, uttered by Lupin after leaving the Chateau de Velines, had no
little influence on Beautrelet's conduct.

Though very calm in the main and invariably master of himself, Lupin,
nevertheless, was subject to moments of exaltation, of a more or less romantic
expansiveness, at once theatrical and good-humored, when he allowed certain
admissions to escape him, certain imprudent speeches which a boy like
Beautrelet could easily turn to profit.

Rightly or wrongly, Beautrelet read one of these involuntary admissions into
that phrase. He was entitled to conclude that, if Lupin drew a comparison
between his own efforts and Beautrelet's in pursuit of the truth about the
Hollow Needle, it was because the two of them possessed identical means of
attaining their object, because Lupin had no elements of success different from
those possessed by his adversary. The chances were alike. Now, with the same
chances, the same elements of success, the same means, ten days had been enough
for Lupin.

What were those elements, those means, those chances? They were reduced, when
all was said, to a knowledge of the pamphlet published in 1815, a pamphlet
which Lupin, no doubt, like Massiban, had found by accident and thanks to which
he had succeeded in discovering the indispensable document in Marie
Antoinette's book of hours.

Therefore, the pamphlet and the document were the only two fundamental facts
upon which Lupin had relied. With these he had built up the whole edifice. He
had had no extraneous aid. The study of the pamphlet and the study of the
document—full stop—that was all.

Well, could not Beautrelet confine himself to the same ground? What was the use
of an impossible struggle? What was the use of those vain investigations, in
which, even supposing that he avoided the pitfalls that were multiplied under
his feet, he was sure, in the end, to achieve the poorest of results?

His decision was clear and immediate; and, in adopting it, he had the happy
instinct that he was on the right path. He began by leaving his
Janson-de-Sailly schoolfellow, without indulging in useless recriminations,
and, taking his portmanteau with him, went and installed himself, after much
hunting about, in a small hotel situated in the very heart of Paris. This hotel
he did not leave for days. At most, he took his meals at the table d'hote. The
rest of the time, locked in his room, with the window-curtains close-drawn, he
spent in thinking.

"Ten days," Arsene Lupin had said.

Beautrelet, striving to forget all that he had done and to remember only the
elements of the pamphlet and the document, aspired eagerly to keep within the
limit of those ten days. However the tenth day passed and the eleventh and the
twelfth; but, on the thirteenth day, a gleam lit up his brain and, very soon,
with the bewildering rapidity of those ideas which develop in us like
miraculous plants, the truth emerged, blossomed, gathered strength. On the
evening of the thirteenth day, he certainly did not know the answer to the
problem, but he knew, to a certainty, one of the methods which Lupin had,
beyond a doubt, employed.

It was a very simple method, hinging on this one question: Is there a link of
any sort uniting all the more or less important historic events with which the
pamphlet connects the mystery of the Hollow Needle?
