An idea suddenly occurred to him, an idea so reasonable, so simple that he did
not doubt its correctness for a second. Were not that D and that F the initials
of the two most important words in the document, the words that
represented—together with the Needle—the essential stations on the road to be
followed: the Chambre des Demoiselles and Fort Frefosse: D for Demoiselles, F
for Frefosse: the connection was too remarkable to be a mere accidental fact.

In that case, the problem stood thus: the two letters D F represent the
relation that exists between the Chambre des Demoiselles and Fort Frefosse, the
single letter D, which begins the line, represents the Demoiselles, that is to
say, the cave in which you have to begin by taking up your position, and the
single letter F, placed in the middle of the line, represents Frefosse, that is
to say, the probable entrance to the underground passage.

Between these various signs, are two more: first, a sort of irregular
rectangle, marked with a stripe in the left bottom corner, and, next, the
figure 19, signs which obviously indicate to those inside the cave the means of
penetrating beneath the fort.

The shape of this rectangle puzzled Isidore. Was there around him, on the walls
of the cave, or at any rate within reach of his eyes, an inscription, anything
whatever, affecting a rectangular shape?

He looked for a long time and was on the point of abandoning that particular
scent when his eyes fell upon the little opening, pierced in the rock, that
acted as a window to the chamber.

Now the edges of this opening just formed a rectangle: corrugated, uneven,
clumsy, but still a rectangle; and Beautrelet at once saw that, by placing his
two feet on the D and the F carved in the stone floor—and this explained the
stroke that surmounted the two letters in the document—he found himself at the
exact height of the window!

He took up his position in this place and gazed out. The window looking
landward, as we know, he saw, first, the path that connected the cave with the
land, a path hung between two precipices; and, next, he caught sight of the
foot of the hillock on which the fort stood. To try and see the fort,
Beautrelet leaned over to the left and it was then that he understood the
meaning of the curved stripe, the comma that marked the left bottom corner in
the document: at the bottom on the left-hand side of the window, a piece of
flint projected and the end of it was curved like a claw. It suggested a
regular shooter's mark. And, when a man applied his eye to this mark, he saw
cut out, on the slope of the mound facing him, a restricted surface of land
occupied almost entirely by an old brick wall, a remnant of the original Fort
Frefosse or of the old Roman oppidum built on this spot.

Beautrelet ran to this piece of wall, which was, perhaps, ten yards long. It
was covered with grass and plants. There was no indication of any kind visible.
And yet that figure 19?

He returned to the cave, took from his pocket a ball of string and a
tape-measure, tied the string to the flint corner, fastened a pebble at the
nineteenth metre and flung it toward the land side. The pebble at most reached
the end of the path.
