A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes, just
as a general is by a covey of young officers. This is what that charming Saint
Francois de Sales calls somewhere "les pretres blancs-becs," callow priests.
Every career has its aspirants, who form a train for those who have attained
eminence in it. There is no power which has not its dependents. There is no
fortune which has not its court. The seekers of the future eddy around the
splendid present. Every metropolis has its staff of officials. Every bishop who
possesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the
seminary, which goes the round, and maintains good order in the episcopal
palace, and mounts guard over monseigneur's smile. To please a bishop is
equivalent to getting one's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate. It is
necessary to walk one's path discreetly; the apostleship does not disdain the
canonship.  Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere, there are big mitres in the
Church. These are the bishops who stand well at Court, who are rich, well
endowed, skilful, accepted by the world, who know how to pray, no doubt, but
who know also how to beg, who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese
dance attendance in their person, who are connecting links between the sacristy
and diplomacy, who are abbes rather than priests, prelates rather than bishops.
Happy those who approach them! Being persons of influence, they create a shower
about them, upon the assiduous and the favored, and upon all the young men who
understand the art of pleasing, of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates,
chaplaincies, and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors. As they
advance themselves, they cause their satellites to progress also; it is a whole
solar system on the march. Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their
suite. Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes, into nice little
promotions. The larger the diocese of the patron, the fatter the curacy for the
favorite. And then, there is Rome. A bishop who understands how to become an
archbishop, an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal, carries you with
him as conclavist; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction, you receive the
pallium, and behold! you are an auditor, then a papal chamberlain, then
monsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and between the
Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot. Every skull-cap
may dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a
king in a regular manner; and what a king! the supreme king. Then what a
nursery of aspirations is a seminary! How many blushing choristers, how many
youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette's pot of milk! Who knows how easy
it is for ambition to call itself vocation? in good faith, perchance, and
deceiving itself, devotee that it is.
