We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D—— on the score of orthodoxy. In the
presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect. The
conscience of the just man should be accepted on his word. Moreover, certain
natures being given, we admit the possible development of all beauties of human
virtue in a belief that differs from our own.  What did he think of this dogma,
or of that mystery? These secrets of the inner tribunal of the conscience are
known only to the tomb, where souls enter naked. The point on which we are
certain is, that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into
hypocrisy in his case. No decay is possible to the diamond. He believed to the
extent of his powers. "Credo in Patrem," he often exclaimed. Moreover, he drew
from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience,
and which whispers to a man, "Thou art with God!" The point which we consider
it our duty to note is, that outside of and beyond his faith, as it were, the
Bishop possessed an excess of love. In was in that quarter, quia multum
amavit,—because he loved much—that he was regarded as vulnerable by "serious
men," "grave persons" and "reasonable people"; favorite locutions of our sad
world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry. What was this
excess of love? It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men, as we have
already pointed out, and which, on occasion, extended even to things. He lived
without disdain. He was indulgent towards God's creation. Every man, even the
best, has within him a thoughtless harshness which he reserves for animals. The
Bishop of D—— had none of that harshness, which is peculiar to many priests,
nevertheless. He did not go as far as the Brahmin, but he seemed to have
weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes: "Who knoweth whither the soul of the
animal goeth?" Hideousness of aspect, deformity of instinct, troubled him not,
and did not arouse his indignation. He was touched, almost softened by them. It
seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds of life
which is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse for them. He
seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties. He examined
without wrath, and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a palimpsest,
that portion of chaos which still exists in nature. This revery sometimes
caused him to utter odd sayings. One morning he was in his garden, and thought
himself alone, but his sister was walking behind him, unseen by him: suddenly
he paused and gazed at something on the ground; it was a large, black, hairy,
frightful spider. His sister heard him say:— "Poor beast! It is not its fault!"
Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness? Puerile
they may be; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to Saint Francis
d'Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius. One day he sprained his ankle in his effort to
avoid stepping on an ant. Thus lived this just man. Sometimes he fell asleep in
his garden, and then there was nothing more venerable possible.  Monseigneur
Bienvenu had formerly been, if the stories anent his youth, and even in regard
to his manhood, were to be believed, a passionate, and, possibly, a violent
man. His universal suavity was less an instinct of nature than the result of a
grand conviction which had filtered into his heart through the medium of life,
and had trickled there slowly, thought by thought; for, in a character, as in a
rock, there may exist apertures made by drops of water. These hollows are
uneffaceable; these formations are indestructible.  In 1815, as we think we
have already said, he reached his seventy-fifth birthday, but he did not appear
to be more than sixty. He was not tall; he was rather plump; and, in order to
combat this tendency, he was fond of taking long strolls on foot; his step was
firm, and his form was but slightly bent, a detail from which we do not pretend
to draw any conclusion. Gregory XVI., at the age of eighty, held himself erect
and smiling, which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop. Monseigneur
Welcome had what the people term a "fine head," but so amiable was he that they
forgot that it was fine.
