When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms, and
of which we have already spoken, people felt at their ease with him, and joy
seemed to radiate from his whole person. His fresh and ruddy complexion, his
very white teeth, all of which he had preserved, and which were displayed by
his smile, gave him that open and easy air which cause the remark to be made of
a man, "He's a good fellow"; and of an old man, "He is a fine man." That, it
will be recalled, was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon. On the first
encounter, and to one who saw him for the first time, he was nothing, in fact,
but a fine man. But if one remained near him for a few hours, and beheld him in
the least degree pensive, the fine man became gradually transfigured, and took
on some imposing quality, I know not what; his broad and serious brow, rendered
august by his white locks, became august also by virtue of meditation; majesty
radiated from his goodness, though his goodness ceased not to be radiant; one
experienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a
smiling angel slowly unfold his wings, without ceasing to smile. Respect, an
unutterable respect, penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart, and
one felt that one had before him one of those strong, thoroughly tried, and
indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but
gentle.  As we have seen, prayer, the celebration of the offices of religion,
alms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation of a bit of
land, fraternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation, confidence, study,
work, filled every day of his life. Filled is exactly the word; certainly the
Bishop's day was quite full to the brim, of good words and good deeds.
Nevertheless, it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his
passing an hour or two in his garden before going to bed, and after the two
women had retired. It seemed to be a sort of rite with him, to prepare himself
for slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the
nocturnal heavens. Sometimes, if the two old women were not asleep, they heard
him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night. He was
there alone, communing with himself, peaceful, adoring, comparing the serenity
of his heart with the serenity of the ether, moved amid the darkness by the
visible splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God,
opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown. At such moments,
while he offered his heart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their
perfume, illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night, as he poured himself
out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of creation, he could not
have told himself, probably, what was passing in his spirit; he felt something
take its flight from him, and something descend into him. Mysterious exchange
of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe!  He thought of the
grandeur and presence of God; of the future eternity, that strange mystery; of
the eternity past, a mystery still more strange; of all the infinities, which
pierced their way into all his senses, beneath his eyes; and, without seeking
to comprehend the incomprehensible, he gazed upon it. He did not study God; he
was dazzled by him. He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms,
which communicate aspects to matter, reveal forces by verifying them, create
individualities in unity, proportions in extent, the innumerable in the
infinite, and, through light, produce beauty. These conjunctions are formed and
dissolved incessantly; hence life and death.
