Since this sort of details might, particularly at the present moment, and to
use an expression now in fashion, give to the Bishop of D—— a certain
"pantheistical" physiognomy, and induce the belief, either to his credit or
discredit, that he entertained one of those personal philosophies which are
peculiar to our century, which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits, and
there take on a form and grow until they usurp the place of religion, we insist
upon it, that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have
thought himself authorized to think anything of the sort. That which
enlightened this man was his heart. His wisdom was made of the light which
comes from there.  No systems; many works. Abstruse speculations contain
vertigo; no, there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in
apocalypses. The apostle may be daring, but the bishop must be timid. He would
probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain problems
which are, in a manner, reserved for terrible great minds. There is a sacred
horror beneath the porches of the enigma; those gloomy openings stand yawning
there, but something tells you, you, a passer-by in life, that you must not
enter. Woe to him who penetrates thither!  Geniuses in the impenetrable depths
of abstraction and pure speculation, situated, so to speak, above all dogmas,
propose their ideas to God. Their prayer audaciously offers discussion. Their
adoration interrogates. This is direct religion, which is full of anxiety and
responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs.  Human meditation has no
limits. At his own risk and peril, it analyzes and digs deep into its own
bedazzlement. One might almost say, that by a sort of splendid reaction, it
with it dazzles nature; the mysterious world which surrounds us renders back
what it has received; it is probable that the contemplators are contemplated.
However that may be, there are on earth men who—are they men?—perceive
distinctly at the verge of the horizons of revery the heights of the absolute,
and who have the terrible vision of the infinite mountain. Monseigneur Welcome
was one of these men; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius. He would have
feared those sublimities whence some very great men even, like Swedenborg and
Pascal, have slipped into insanity. Certainly, these powerful reveries have
their moral utility, and by these arduous paths one approaches to ideal
perfection. As for him, he took the path which shortens,—the Gospel's.  He did
not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah's mantle; he
projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events; he did not see
to condense in flame the light of things; he had nothing of the prophet and
nothing of the magician about him. This humble soul loved, and that was all.
That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is probable: but
one can no more pray too much than one can love too much; and if it is a heresy
to pray beyond the texts, Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be heretics.  He
inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates. The universe appeared
to him like an immense malady; everywhere he felt fever, everywhere he heard
the sound of suffering, and, without seeking to solve the enigma, he strove to
dress the wound. The terrible spectacle of created things developed tenderness
in him; he was occupied only in finding for himself, and in inspiring others
with the best way to compassionate and relieve. That which exists was for this
good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation.
