Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty. The terms of the Code were explicit. There
occur formidable hours in our civilization; there are moments when the penal
laws decree a shipwreck. What an ominous minute is that in which society draws
back and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being! Jean
Valjean was condemned to five years in the galleys.  On the 22d of April, 1796,
the victory of Montenotte, won by the general-in-chief of the army of Italy,
whom the message of the Directory to the Five Hundred, of the 2d of Floreal,
year IV., calls Buona-Parte, was announced in Paris; on that same day a great
gang of galley-slaves was put in chains at Bicêtre. Jean Valjean formed a part
of that gang. An old turnkey of the prison, who is now nearly eighty years old,
still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who was chained to the end of
the fourth line, in the north angle of the courtyard. He was seated on the
ground like the others. He did not seem to comprehend his position, except that
it was horrible. It is probable that he, also, was disentangling from amid the
vague ideas of a poor man, ignorant of everything, something excessive. While
the bolt of his iron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows
from the hammer, he wept, his tears stifled him, they impeded his speech; he
only managed to say from time to time, "I was a tree-pruner at Faverolles."
Then still sobbing, he raised his right hand and lowered it gradually seven
times, as though he were touching in succession seven heads of unequal heights,
and from this gesture it was divined that the thing which he had done, whatever
it was, he had done for the sake of clothing and nourishing seven little
children.  He set out for Toulon. He arrived there, after a journey of
twenty-seven days, on a cart, with a chain on his neck. At Toulon he was
clothed in the red cassock. All that had constituted his life, even to his
name, was effaced; he was no longer even Jean Valjean; he was number 24,601.
What became of his sister? What became of the seven children? Who troubled
himself about that? What becomes of the handful of leaves from the young tree
which is sawed off at the root?  It is always the same story. These poor living
beings, these creatures of God, henceforth without support, without guide,
without refuge, wandered away at random,—who even knows?—each in his own
direction perhaps, and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist
which engulfs solitary destinies; gloomy shades, into which disappear in
succession so many unlucky heads, in the sombre march of the human race. They
quitted the country. The clock-tower of what had been their village forgot
them; the boundary line of what had been their field forgot them; after a few
years' residence in the galleys, Jean Valjean himself forgot them. In that
heart, where there had been a wound, there was a scar. That is all. Only once,
during all the time which he spent at Toulon, did he hear his sister mentioned.
This happened, I think, towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity. I
know not through what channels the news reached him. Some one who had known
them in their own country had seen his sister. She was in Paris. She lived in a
poor street Rear Saint-Sulpice, in the Rue du Gindre. She had with her only one
child, a little boy, the youngest. Where were the other six? Perhaps she did
not know herself. Every morning she went to a printing office, No. 3 Rue du
Sabot, where she was a folder and stitcher. She was obliged to be there at six
o'clock in the morning—long before daylight in winter. In the same building
with the printing office there was a school, and to this school she took her
little boy, who was seven years old. But as she entered the printing office at
six, and the school only opened at seven, the child had to wait in the
courtyard, for the school to open, for an hour—one hour of a winter night in
the open air! They would not allow the child to come into the printing office,
because he was in the way, they said. When the workmen passed in the morning,
they beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement, overcome with
drowsiness, and often fast asleep in the shadow, crouched down and doubled up
over his basket. When it rained, an old woman, the portress, took pity on him;
she took him into her den, where there was a pallet, a spinning-wheel, and two
wooden chairs, and the little one slumbered in a corner, pressing himself close
to the cat that he might suffer less from cold. At seven o'clock the school
opened, and he entered. That is what was told to Jean Valjean.
