Anger may be both foolish and absurd; one can be irritated wrongfully; one is
exasperated only when there is some show of right on one's side at bottom. Jean
Valjean felt himself exasperated.  And besides, human society had done him
nothing but harm; he had never seen anything of it save that angry face which
it calls Justice, and which it shows to those whom it strikes. Men had only
touched him to bruise him. Every contact with them had been a blow. Never,
since his infancy, since the days of his mother, of his sister, had he ever
encountered a friendly word and a kindly glance. From suffering to suffering,
he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a war; and that in this
war he was the conquered. He had no other weapon than his hate. He resolved to
whet it in the galleys and to bear it away with him when he departed.  There
was at Toulon a school for the convicts, kept by the Ignorantin friars, where
the most necessary branches were taught to those of the unfortunate men who had
a mind for them. He was of the number who had a mind. He went to school at the
age of forty, and learned to read, to write, to cipher. He felt that to fortify
his intelligence was to fortify his hate. In certain cases, education and
enlightenment can serve to eke out evil.  This is a sad thing to say; after
having judged society, which had caused his unhappiness, he judged Providence,
which had made society, and he condemned it also.  Thus during nineteen years
of torture and slavery, this soul mounted and at the same time fell. Light
entered it on one side, and darkness on the other.  Jean Valjean had not, as we
have seen, an evil nature. He was still good when he arrived at the galleys. He
there condemned society, and felt that he was becoming wicked; he there
condemned Providence, and was conscious that he was becoming impious.  It is
difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point.  Does human nature thus
change utterly and from top to bottom? Can the man created good by God be
rendered wicked by man? Can the soul be completely made over by fate, and
become evil, fate being evil? Can the heart become misshapen and contract
incurable deformities and infirmities under the oppression of a
disproportionate unhappiness, as the vertebral column beneath too low a vault?
Is there not in every human soul, was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in
particular, a first spark, a divine element, incorruptible in this world,
immortal in the other, which good can develop, fan, ignite, and make to glow
with splendor, and which evil can never wholly extinguish?  Grave and obscure
questions, to the last of which every physiologist would probably have
responded no, and that without hesitation, had he beheld at Toulon, during the
hours of repose, which were for Jean Valjean hours of revery, this gloomy
galley-slave, seated with folded arms upon the bar of some capstan, with the
end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its dragging, serious,
silent, and thoughtful, a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath,
condemned by civilization, and regarding heaven with severity.
