Certainly,—and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact,—the observing
physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery; he would, perchance,
have pitied this sick man, of the law's making; but he would not have even
essayed any treatment; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of
which he would have caught a glimpse within this soul, and, like Dante at the
portals of hell, he would have effaced from this existence the word which the
finger of God has, nevertheless, inscribed upon the brow of every man,—hope.
Was this state of his soul, which we have attempted to analyze, as perfectly
clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read us? Did
Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after their formation, and had he seen
distinctly during the process of their formation, all the elements of which his
moral misery was composed? Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a
perfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had, by
degrees, mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many
years, formed the inner horizon of his spirit? Was he conscious of all that
passed within him, and of all that was working there? That is something which
we do not presume to state; it is something which we do not even believe. There
was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean, even after his misfortune, to prevent
much vagueness from still lingering there. At times he did not rightly know
himself what he felt. Jean Valjean was in the shadows; he suffered in the
shadows; he hated in the shadows; one might have said that he hated in advance
of himself. He dwelt habitually in this shadow, feeling his way like a blind
man and a dreamer. Only, at intervals, there suddenly came to him, from without
and from within, an access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a livid and
rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul, and caused to appear abruptly all
around him, in front, behind, amid the gleams of a frightful light, the hideous
precipices and the sombre perspective of his destiny.  The flash passed, the
night closed in again; and where was he? He no longer knew. The peculiarity of
pains of this nature, in which that which is pitiless—that is to say, that
which is brutalizing—predominates, is to transform a man, little by little, by
a sort of stupid transfiguration, into a wild beast; sometimes into a ferocious
beast.  Jean Valjean's successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone
suffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul. Jean
Valjean would have renewed these attempts, utterly useless and foolish as they
were, as often as the opportunity had presented itself, without reflecting for
an instant on the result, nor on the experiences which he had already gone
through. He escaped impetuously, like the wolf who finds his cage open.
Instinct said to him, "Flee!" Reason would have said, "Remain!" But in the
presence of so violent a temptation, reason vanished; nothing remained but
instinct. The beast alone acted. When he was recaptured, the fresh severities
inflicted on him only served to render him still more wild.
