One detail, which we must not omit, is that he possessed a physical strength
which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of the galleys. At
work, at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan, Jean Valjean was worth
four men. He sometimes lifted and sustained enormous weights on his back; and
when the occasion demanded it, he replaced that implement which is called a
jack-screw, and was formerly called orgueil [pride], whence, we may remark in
passing, is derived the name of the Rue Montorgueil, near the Halles
[Fishmarket] in Paris. His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw.
Once, when they were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon, one of
those admirable caryatids of Puget, which support the balcony, became loosened,
and was on the point of falling. Jean Valjean, who was present, supported the
caryatid with his shoulder, and gave the workmen time to arrive.  His
suppleness even exceeded his strength. Certain convicts who were forever
dreaming of escape, ended by making a veritable science of force and skill
combined. It is the science of muscles. An entire system of mysterious statics
is daily practised by prisoners, men who are forever envious of the flies and
birds. To climb a vertical surface, and to find points of support where hardly
a projection was visible, was play to Jean Valjean. An angle of the wall being
given, with the tension of his back and legs, with his elbows and his heels
fitted into the unevenness of the stone, he raised himself as if by magic to
the third story. He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley
prison.  He spoke but little. He laughed not at all. An excessive emotion was
required to wring from him, once or twice a year, that lugubrious laugh of the
convict, which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon. To all appearance, he
seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of something terrible.  He
was absorbed, in fact.  Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete
nature and a crushed intelligence, he was confusedly conscious that some
monstrous thing was resting on him. In that obscure and wan shadow within which
he crawled, each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance,
he perceived with terror, mingled with rage, a sort of frightful accumulation
of things, collecting and mounting above him, beyond the range of his
vision,—laws, prejudices, men, and deeds,—whose outlines escaped him, whose
mass terrified him, and which was nothing else than that prodigious pyramid
which we call civilization. He distinguished, here and there in that swarming
and formless mass, now near him, now afar off and on inaccessible table-lands,
some group, some detail, vividly illuminated; here the galley-sergeant and his
cudgel; there the gendarme and his sword; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at
the top, like a sort of sun, the Emperor, crowned and dazzling. It seemed to
him that these distant splendors, far from dissipating his night, rendered it
more funereal and more black. All this—laws, prejudices, deeds, men,
things—went and came above him, over his head, in accordance with the
complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization, walking
over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in its cruelty and
inexorability in its indifference. Souls which have fallen to the bottom of all
possible misfortune, unhappy men lost in the lowest of those limbos at which no
one any longer looks, the reproved of the law, feel the whole weight of this
human society, so formidable for him who is without, so frightful for him who
is beneath, resting upon their heads.
