He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him; then he
closed them again, with the intention of going to sleep once more.  When many
varied sensations have agitated the day, when various matters preoccupy the
mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. Sleep comes more easily
than it returns. This is what happened to Jean Valjean. He could not get to
sleep again, and he fell to thinking.  He was at one of those moments when the
thoughts which one has in one's mind are troubled. There was a sort of dark
confusion in his brain. His memories of the olden time and of the immediate
present floated there pell-mell and mingled confusedly, losing their proper
forms, becoming disproportionately large, then suddenly disappearing, as in a
muddy and perturbed pool. Many thoughts occurred to him; but there was one
which kept constantly presenting itself afresh, and which drove away all
others. We will mention this thought at once: he had observed the six sets of
silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had placed on the
table.  Those six sets of silver haunted him.—They were there.—A few paces
distant.—Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which
he then was, the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a
little cupboard near the head of the bed.—He had taken careful note of this
cupboard.—On the right, as you entered from the dining-room.—They were
solid.—And old silver.—From the ladle one could get at least two hundred
francs.—Double what he had earned in nineteen years.—It is true that he would
have earned more if "the administration had not robbed him." His mind wavered
for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was certainly mingled some
struggle. Three o'clock struck. He opened his eyes again, drew himself up
abruptly into a sitting posture, stretched out his arm and felt of his
knapsack, which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove; then he hung his
legs over the edge of the bed, and placed his feet on the floor, and thus found
himself, almost without knowing it, seated on his bed.  He remained for a time
thoughtfully in this attitude, which would have been suggestive of something
sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark, the only person awake
in that house where all were sleeping. All of a sudden he stooped down, removed
his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed; then he resumed his
thoughtful attitude, and became motionless once more.  Throughout this hideous
meditation, the thoughts which we have above indicated moved incessantly
through his brain; entered, withdrew, re-entered, and in a manner oppressed
him; and then he thought, also, without knowing why, and with the mechanical
persistence of revery, of a convict named Brevet, whom he had known in the
galleys, and whose trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted
cotton. The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his
mind.
