It is to be above the weight and crowd of your great and important affairs, to
know, as you do, how to lend yourself, and attend to small matters in their
turn, according to the duty of your royal dignity, which exposes you at all
times to every description and degree of person and employment. Yet, that your
Majesty should have deigned to consider my letter, and direct a reply to be
made to it, I prefer to owe, less to your strong understanding, than to your
kindness of heart. I have always looked forward to your enjoyment of your
present fortune, and you may recollect that, even when I had to make confession
of itto my cure, I viewed your successes with satisfaction: now, with the
greater propriety and freedom, I embrace them affectionately. They serve you
where you are as positive matters of fact; but they serve us here no less by
the fame which they diffuse: the echo carries as much weight as the blow. We
should not be able to derive from the justice of your cause such powerful
arguments for the maintenance and reduction of your subjects, as we do from the
reports of the success of your undertaking; and then I have to assure your
Majesty, that the recent changes to your advantage, which you observe
hereabouts, the prosperous issue of your proceedings at Dieppe, have
opportunely seconded the honest zeal and marvellous prudence of M. the Marshal
de Matignon, from whom I flatter myself that you do not receive day by day
accounts of such good and signal services without remembering my assurances and
expectations. I look to the next summer, not only for fruits which we may eat,
but for those to grow out of our common tranquillity, and that it will pass
over our heads with the same even tenor of happiness, dissipating, like its
predecessors, all the fine promises with which your adversaries sustain the
spirits of their followers. The popular inclinations resemble a tidal wave; if
the current once commences in your favour, it will go on of its own force to
the end. I could have desired much that the private gain of the soldiers of
your army, and the necessity for satisfying them, had not deprived you,
especially in this principal town, of the glorious credit of treating your
mutinous subjects, in the midst of victory, with greater clemency than their
own protectors, and that, as distinguished from a passing and usurped repute,
you could have shown them to be really your own, by the exercise of a
protection truly paternal and royal. In the conduct of such affairs as you have
in hand, men are obliged to have recourse to unusual expedients. It is always
seen that they are surmounted by their magnitude and difficulty; it not being
found easy to complete the conquest by arms and force, the end has been
accomplished by clemency and generosity, excellent lures to draw men
particularly towards the just and legitimate side. If there is to be severity
and punishment, let it be deferred till success has been assured. A great
conqueror of past times boasts that he gave his enemies as great an inducement
to love him, as his friends. And here we feel already some effect of the
favourable impression produced upon our rebellious towns by the contrast
between their rude treatment, and that of those which are loyal to you.
Desiring your Majesty a happiness more tangible and less hazardous, and that
you may be beloved rather than feared by your people, and believing that your
welfare and theirs are of necessity knit together, I rejoice to think that the
progress which you make is one towards more practicable conditions of peace, as
well as towards victory!  Sire, your letter of the last of November came to my
hand only just now, when the time which it pleased you to name for meeting you
at Tours had already passed. I take it as a singular favour that you should
have deigned to desire a visit from so useless a person, but one who is wholly
yours, and more so even by affection than from duty. You have acted very
commendably in adapting yourself, in the matter of external forms, to your new
fortunes; but the preservation of your old affability and frankness in private
intercourse is entitled to an equal share of praise. You have condescended to
take thought for my age, no less than for the desire which I have to see you,
where you may be at rest from these laborious agitations. Will not that be soon
at Paris, Sire? and may nothing prevent me from presenting myself there!
