I have received this morning your letter, which I have communicated to M. de
Gourgues, and we have dined together at the house of M.[the mayor] of
Bourdeaux. As to the inconvenience of transporting the money named in your
memorandum, you see how difficult a thing it is to provide for; but you may be
sure that we shall keep as close a watch over it as possible. I used every
exertion to discover the man of whom you spoke. He has not been here; and M. de
Bordeaux has shown me a letter in which he mentions that he could not come to
see the Director of Bordeaux, as he intended, having been informed that you
mistrust him. The letter is of the day before yesterday. If I could have found
him, I might perhaps have pursued the gentler course, being uncertain of your
views; but I entreat you nevertheless to feel no manner of doubt that I refuse
to carry out any wishes of yours, and that, where your commands are concerned,
I know no distinction of person or matter. I hope that you have in Guienne many
as well affected to you as I am. They report that the Nantes galleys are
advancing towards Brouage. M. the Marshal de Biron has not yet left. Those who
were charged to convey the message to M. d'Usee say that they cannot find him;
and I believe that, if he has been here, he is so no longer. We keep a vigilant
eye on our gates and guards, and we look after them a little more attentively
in your absence, which makes me apprehensive, not merely on account of the
preservation of the town, but likewise for your oven sake, knowing that the
enemies of the king feel how necessary you are to his service, and how ill we
should prosper without you. I am afraid that, in the part where you are, you
will be overtaken by so many affairs requiring your attention on every side,
that it will take you a long time and involve great difficulty before you have
disposed of everything. If there is any important news, I will despatch an
express at once, and you may conclude that nothing is stirring if you do not
hear from me: at the same time begging you to bear in mind that movements of
this kind are wont to be so sudden and unexpected that, if they occur, they
will grasp me by the throat, before they say a word. I will do what I can to
collect news, and for this purpose I will make a point of visiting and seeing
men of every shade of opinion. Down to the present time nothing is stirring. M.
de Londel has seen me this morning, and we have been arranging for some
advances for the place, where I shall go to-morrow morning. Since I began this
letter, I have learnt from Chartreux that two gentlemen, describing themselves
as in the service of M. de Guise, and coming from Agen, have passed near
Chartreux; but I was not able to ascertain which road they have taken. They are
expecting you at Agen. The Sieur de Mauvesin came as far as Canteloup, and
thence returned, having got some intelligence. I am in search of one Captain
Rous, to whom . . . wrote, trying to draw him into his cause by all sorts of
promises. The rumour of the two Nantes galleys ready to descend on Brouage is
confirmed as certain; they carry two companies of foot. M. de Mercure is at
Nantes. The Sieur de la Courbe said to M. the President Nesmond that M.
d'Elbeuf is on this side of Angiers, and lodges with his father. He is drawing
towards Lower Poictou with 4000 foot and 400 or 500 horse, having been
reinforced by the troops of M. de Brissac and others, and M. de Mercure is to
join him. The report goes also that M. du Maine is about to take the command of
all the forces they have collected in Auvergne, and that he will cross Le Foret
to advance on Rouergue and us, that is to say, on the King of Navarre, against
whom all this is being directed. M. de Lansac is at Bourg, and has two war
vessels, which remain in attendance on him. His functions are naval. I tell you
what I learn, and mix up together the more or less probable hearsay of the town
with actual matter of fact, that you may be in possession of everything. I beg
you most humbly to return directly affairs may allow you to do so, and assure
you that, meanwhile, we shall not spare our labour, or (if that were necessary)
our life, to maintain the king's authority throughout. Monseigneur, I kiss your
hands very respectfully, and pray God to have you in His keeping. 
