These things might appear strange, had it not been a general practice in all
ages not only to extend the concern of ourselves beyond this life, but,
moreover, to fancy that the favour of Heaven does not only very often accompany
us to the grave, but has also, even after life, a concern for our ashes. Of
which there are so many ancient examples (to say nothing of those of our own
observation), that it is not necessary I should longer insist upon it. Edward
I., King of England, having in the long wars betwixt him and Robert, King of
Scotland, had experience of how great importance his own immediate presence was
to the success of his affairs, having ever been victorious in whatever he
undertook in his own person, when he came to die, bound his son in a solemn
oath that, so soon as he should be dead he should boil his body till the flesh
parted from the bones, and bury the flesh, reserving the bones to carry
continually with him in his army, so often as he should be obliged to go
against the Scots, as if destiny had inevitably attached victory, even to his
remains. John Zisca, the same who, to vindication of Wicliffe's heresies,
troubled the Bohemian state, left order that they should flay him after his
death, and of his skin make a drum to carry in the war against his enemies,
fancying it would contribute to the continuation of the successes he had always
obtained in the wars against them. In like manner certain of the Indians, in
their battles with the Spaniards, carried with them the bones of one of their
captains, in consideration of the victories they had formerly obtained under
his conduct. And other people of the same New World carry about with them, in
their wars, the relics of valiant men who have died in battle, to incite their
courage and advance their fortune. Of which examples the first reserve nothing
for the tomb but the reputation they have acquired by their former
achievements, but these attribute to them a certain present and active power.
The proceeding of Captain Bayard is of a better composition, who finding
himself wounded to death with an harquebuss shot, and being importuned to
retire out of the fight, made answer that he would not begin at the last gasp
to turn his back to the enemy, and accordingly still fought on, till feeling
himself too faint and no longer able to sit on his horse, he commanded his
steward to set him down at the foot of a tree, but so that he might die with
his face towards the enemy, which he did.  I must yet add another example,
equally remarkable for the present consideration with any of the former. The
Emperor Maximilian, great-grandfather to the now King Philip,—[Philip II. of
Spain.]—was a prince endowed throughout with great and extraordinary qualities,
and amongst the rest with a singular beauty of person, but had withal a humour
very contrary to that of other princes, who for the despatch of their most
important affairs convert their close-stool into a chair of State, which was,
that he would never permit any of his bedchamber, how familiar soever, to see
him in that posture, and would steal aside to make water as religiously as a
virgin, shy to discover to his physician or any other whomsoever those parts
that we are accustomed to conceal. I myself, who have so impudent a way of
talking, am, nevertheless, naturally so modest this way, that unless at the
importunity of necessity or pleasure, I scarcely ever communicate to the sight
of any either those parts or actions that custom orders us to conceal, wherein
I suffer more constraint than I conceive is very well becoming a man,
especially of my profession. But he nourished this modest humour to such a
degree of superstition as to give express orders in his last will that they
should put him on drawers so soon as he should be dead; to which, methinks, he
would have done well to have added that he should be blindfolded, too, that put
them on. The charge that Cyrus left with his children, that neither they, nor
any other, should either see or touch his body after the soul was departed from
it,—[Xenophon, Cyropedia, viii. 7.]—I attribute to some superstitious devotion
of his; for both his historian and himself, amongst their great qualities,
marked the whole course of their lives with a singular respect and reverence to
religion.
