Another, though contrary curiosity (of which singularity, also, I do not want
domestic example), seems to be somewhat akin to this, that a man shall cudgel
his brains at the last moments of his life to contrive his obsequies to so
particular and unusual a parsimony as of one servant with a lantern, I see this
humour commended, and the appointment of Marcus. Emilius Lepidus, who forbade
his heirs to bestow upon his hearse even the common ceremonies in use upon such
occasions. Is it yet temperance and frugality to avoid expense and pleasure of
which the use and knowledge are imperceptible to us? See, here, an easy and
cheap reformation. If instruction were at all necessary in this case, I should
be of opinion that in this, as in all other actions of life, each person should
regulate the matter according to his fortune; and the philosopher Lycon
prudently ordered his friends to dispose of his body where they should think
most fit, and as to his funeral, to order it neither too superfluous nor too
mean. For my part, I should wholly refer the ordering of this ceremony to
custom, and shall, when the time comes, accordingly leave it to their
discretion to whose lot it shall fall to do me that last office. "Totus hic
locus est contemnendus in nobis, non negligendus in nostris;"—["The place of
our sepulture is to be contemned by us, but not to be neglected by our
friends."—Cicero, Tusc. i. 45.]— and it was a holy saying of a saint, "Curatio
funeris, conditio sepultura: pompa exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum solatia, quam
subsidia mortuorum."—["The care of death, the place of sepulture, the pomps of
obsequies, are rather consolations to the living than succours to the dead."
August. De Civit. Dei, i. 12.]—Which made Socrates answer Crito, who, at death,
asked him how he would be buried: "How you will," said he. "If I were to
concern myself beyond the present about this affair, I should be most tempted,
as the greatest satisfaction of this kind, to imitate those who in their
lifetime entertain themselves with the ceremony and honours of their own
obsequies beforehand, and are pleased with beholding their own dead countenance
in marble. Happy are they who can gratify their senses by insensibility, and
live by their death!" I am ready to conceive an implacable hatred against all
popular domination, though I think it the most natural and equitable of all, so
oft as I call to mind the inhuman injustice of the people of Athens, who,
without remission, or once vouchsafing to hear what they had to say for
themselves, put to death their brave captains newly returned triumphant from a
naval victory they had obtained over the Lacedaemonians near the Arginusian
Isles, the most bloody and obstinate engagement that ever the Greeks fought at
sea; because (after the victory) they followed up the blow and pursued the
advantages presented to them by the rule of war, rather than stay to gather up
and bury their dead. And the execution is yet rendered more odious by the
behaviour of Diomedon, who, being one of the condemned, and a man of most
eminent virtue, political and military, after having heard the sentence,
advancing to speak, no audience till then having been allowed, instead of
laying before them his own cause, or the impiety of so cruel a sentence, only
expressed a solicitude for his judges' preservation, beseeching the gods to
convert this sentence to their good, and praying that, for neglecting to fulfil
the vows which he and his companions had made (with which he also acquainted
them) in acknowledgment of so glorious a success, they might not draw down the
indignation of the gods upon them; and so without more words went courageously
to his death.
