It is not without good reason said "that he who has not a good memory should
never take upon him the trade of lying." I know very well that the
grammarians—[Nigidius, Aulus Gellius, xi. ii; Nonius, v. 80.]— distinguish
betwixt an untruth and a lie, and say that to tell an untruth is to tell a
thing that is false, but that we ourselves believe to be true; and that the
definition of the word to lie in Latin, from which our French is taken, is to
tell a thing which we know in our conscience to be untrue; and it is of this
last sort of liars only that I now speak. Now, these do either wholly contrive
and invent the untruths they utter, or so alter and disguise a true story that
it ends in a lie. When they disguise and often alter the same story, according
to their own fancy, 'tis very hard for them, at one time or another, to escape
being trapped, by reason that the real truth of the thing, having first taken
possession of the memory, and being there lodged impressed by the medium of
knowledge and science, it will be difficult that it should not represent itself
to the imagination, and shoulder out falsehood, which cannot there have so sure
and settled footing as the other; and the circumstances of the first true
knowledge evermore running in their minds, will be apt to make them forget
those that are illegitimate, and only, forged by their own fancy. In what they,
wholly invent, forasmuch as there is no contrary impression to jostle their
invention there seems to be less danger of tripping; and yet even this by
reason it is a vain body and without any hold, is very apt to escape the
memory, if it be not well assured. Of which I had very pleasant experience, at
the expense of such as profess only to form and accommodate their speech to the
affair they have in hand, or to humour of the great folks to whom they are
speaking; for the circumstances to which these men stick not to enslave their
faith and conscience being subject to several changes, their language must vary
accordingly: whence it happens that of the same thing they tell one man that it
is this, and another that it is that, giving it several colours; which men, if
they once come to confer notes, and find out the cheat, what becomes of this
fine art? To which may be added, that they must of necessity very often
ridiculously trap themselves; for what memory can be sufficient to retain so
many different shapes as they have forged upon one and the same subject? I have
known many in my time very ambitious of the repute of this fine wit; but they
do not see that if they have the reputation of it, the effect can no longer be.
In plain truth, lying is an accursed vice. We are not men, nor have other tie
upon one another, but by our word. If we did but discover the horror and
gravity of it, we should pursue it with fire and sword, and more justly than
other crimes. I see that parents commonly, and with indiscretion enough,
correct their children for little innocent faults, and torment them for wanton
tricks, that have neither impression nor consequence; whereas, in my opinion,
lying only, and, which is of something a lower form, obstinacy, are the faults
which are to be severely whipped out of them, both in their infancy and in
their progress, otherwise they grow up and increase with them; and after a
tongue has once got the knack of lying, 'tis not to be imagined how impossible
it is to reclaim it whence it comes to pass that we see some, who are otherwise
very honest men, so subject and enslaved to this vice. I have an honest lad to
my tailor, whom I never knew guilty of one truth, no, not when it had been to
his advantage. If falsehood had, like truth, but one face only, we should be
upon better terms; for we should then take for certain the contrary to what the
liar says: but the reverse of truth has a hundred thousand forms, and a field
indefinite, without bound or limit. The Pythagoreans make good to be certain
and finite, and evil, infinite and uncertain. There are a thousand ways to miss
the white, there is only one to hit it. For my own part, I have this vice in so
great horror, that I am not sure I could prevail with my conscience to secure
myself from the most manifest and extreme danger by an impudent and solemn lie.
An ancient father says "that a dog we know is better company than a man whose
language we do not understand."
