The law of resolution and constancy does not imply that we ought not, as much
as in us lies, to decline and secure ourselves from the mischiefs and
inconveniences that threaten us; nor, consequently, that we shall not fear lest
they should surprise us: on the contrary, all decent and honest ways and means
of securing ourselves from harms, are not only permitted, but, moreover,
commendable, and the business of constancy chiefly is, bravely to stand to, and
stoutly to suffer those inconveniences which are not possibly to be avoided. So
that there is no supple motion of body, nor any movement in the handling of
arms, how irregular or ungraceful soever, that we need condemn, if they serve
to protect us from the blow that is made against us.  Several very warlike
nations have made use of a retreating and flying way of fight as a thing of
singular advantage, and, by so doing, have made their backs more dangerous to
their enemies than their faces. Of which kind of fighting the Turks still
retain something in their practice of arms; and Socrates, in Plato, laughs at
Laches, who had defined fortitude to be a standing firm in the ranks against
the enemy. "What!" says he, "would it, then, be a reputed cowardice to overcome
them by giving ground?" urging, at the same time, the authority of Homer, who
commends in AEneas the science of flight. And whereas Laches, considering
better of it, admits the practice as to the Scythians, and, in general, all
cavalry whatever, he again attacks him with the example of the Lacedaemonian
foot—a nation of all other the most obstinate in maintaining their ground—who,
in the battle of Plataea, not being able to break into the Persian phalanx,
bethought themselves to disperse and retire, that by the enemy supposing they
fled, they might break and disunite that vast body of men in the pursuit, and
by that stratagem obtained the victory.  As for the Scythians, 'tis said of
them, that when Darius went his expedition to subdue them, he sent, by a
herald, highly to reproach their king, that he always retired before him and
declined a battle; to which Idanthyrses,—[Herod., iv. 127.]—for that was his
name, returned answer, that it was not for fear of him, or of any man living,
that he did so, but that it was the way of marching in practice with his
nation, who had neither tilled fields, cities, nor houses to defend, or to fear
the enemy should make any advantage of but that if he had such a stomach to
fight, let him but come to view their ancient places of sepulture, and there he
should have his fill.  Nevertheless, as to cannon-shot, when a body of men are
drawn up in the face of a train of artillery, as the occasion of war often
requires, it is unhandsome to quit their post to avoid the danger, forasmuch as
by reason of its violence and swiftness we account it inevitable; and many a
one, by ducking, stepping aside, and such other motions of fear, has been, at
all events, sufficiently laughed at by his companions. And yet, in the
expedition that the Emperor Charles V. made against us into Provence, the
Marquis de Guast going to reconnoitre the city of Arles, and advancing out of
the cover of a windmill, under favour of which he had made his approach, was
perceived by the Seigneurs de Bonneval and the Seneschal of Agenois, who were
walking upon the 'theatre aux ayenes'; who having shown him to the Sieur de
Villiers, commissary of the artillery, he pointed a culverin so admirably well,
and levelled it so exactly right against him, that had not the Marquis, seeing
fire given to it, slipped aside, it was certainly concluded the shot had taken
him full in the body. And, in like manner, some years before, Lorenzo de'
Medici, Duke of Urbino, and father to the queen-mother—[Catherine de' Medici,
mother of Henry III.]—laying siege to Mondolfo, a place in the territories of
the Vicariat in Italy, seeing the cannoneer give fire to a piece that pointed
directly against him, it was well for him that he ducked, for otherwise the
shot, that only razed the top of his head, had doubtless hit him full in the
breast. To say truth, I do not think that these evasions are performed upon the
account of judgment; for how can any man living judge of high or low aim on so
sudden an occasion? And it is much more easy to believe that fortune favoured
their apprehension, and that it might be as well at another time to make them
face the danger, as to seek to avoid it. For my own part, I confess I cannot
forbear starting when the rattle of a harquebuse thunders in my ears on a
sudden, and in a place where I am not to expect it, which I have also observed
in others, braver fellows than I.
