Since it has pleased God to endue us with some capacity of reason, to the end
we may not, like brutes, be servilely subject and enslaved to the laws common
to both, but that we should by judgment and a voluntary liberty apply ourselves
to them, we ought, indeed, something to yield to the simple authority of
nature, but not suffer ourselves to be tyrannically hurried away and
transported by her; reason alone should have the conduct of our inclinations.
I, for my part, have a strange disgust for those propensions that are started
in us without the mediation and direction of the judgment, as, upon the subject
I am speaking of, I cannot entertain that passion of dandling and caressing
infants scarcely born, having as yet neither motion of soul nor shape of body
distinguishable, by which they can render themselves amiable, and have not
willingly suffered them to be nursed near me. A true and regular affection
ought to spring and increase with the knowledge they give us of themselves, and
then, if they are worthy of it, the natural propension walking hand in hand
with reason, to cherish them with a truly paternal love; and so to judge, also,
if they be otherwise, still rendering ourselves to reason, notwithstanding the
inclination of nature. 'Tis oft-times quite otherwise; and, most commonly, we
find ourselves more taken with the running up and down, the games, and puerile
simplicities of our children, than we do, afterwards, with their most complete
actions; as if we had loved them for our sport, like monkeys, and not as men;
and some there are, who are very liberal in buying them balls to play withal,
who are very close-handed for the least necessary expense when they come to
age. Nay, it looks as if the jealousy of seeing them appear in and enjoy the
world when we are about to leave it, rendered us more niggardly and stingy
towards them; it vexes us that they tread upon our heels, as if to solicit us
to go out; if this were to be feared, since the order of things will have it so
that they cannot, to speak the truth, be nor live, but at the expense of our
being and life, we should never meddle with being fathers at all.  For my part,
I think it cruelty and injustice not to receive them into the share and society
of our goods, and not to make them partakers in the intelligence of our
domestic affairs when they are capable, and not to lessen and contract our own
expenses to make the more room for theirs, seeing we beget them to that effect.
'Tis unjust that an old fellow, broken and half dead, should alone, in a corner
of the chimney, enjoy the money that would suffice for the maintenance and
advancement of many children, and suffer them, in the meantime, to lose their'
best years for want of means to advance themselves in the public service and
the knowledge of men. A man by this course drives them to despair, and to seek
out by any means, how unjust or dishonourable soever, to provide for their own
support: as I have, in my time, seen several young men of good extraction so
addicted to stealing, that no correction could cure them of it. I know one of a
very good family, to whom, at the request of a brother of his, a very honest
and brave gentleman, I once spoke on this account, who made answer, and
confessed to me roundly, that he had been put upon this paltry practice by the
severity and avarice of his father; but that he was now so accustomed to it he
could not leave it off. And, at that very time, he was trapped stealing a
lady's rings, having come into her chamber, as she was dressing with several
others. He put me in mind of a story I had heard of another gentleman, so
perfect and accomplished in this fine trade in his youth, that, after he came
to his estate and resolved to give it over, he could not hold his hands,
nevertheless, if he passed by a shop where he saw anything he liked, from
catching it up, though it put him to the shame of sending afterwards to pay for
it. And I have myself seen several so habituated to this quality that even
amongst their comrades they could not forbear filching, though with intent to
restore what they had taken. I am a Gascon, and yet there is no vice I so
little understand as that; I hate it something more by disposition than I
condemn it by reason; I do not so much as desire anything of another man's.
This province of ours is, in plain truth, a little more decried than the other
parts of the kingdom; and yet we have several times seen, in our times, men of
good families of other provinces, in the hands of justice, convicted of
abominable thefts. I fear this vice is, in some sort, to be attributed to the
fore-mentioned vice of the fathers.
