I do not know any one that can muster more parts, both natural and acquired,
proper to maintain dominion, than he; yet he is fallen from it like a child.
For this reason it is that I have picked out him, amongst several others that I
know of the same humour, for the greatest example. It were matter for a
question in the schools, whether he is better thus or otherwise. In his
presence, all submit to and bow to him, and give so much way to his vanity that
nobody ever resists him; he has his fill of assents, of seeming fear,
submission, and respect. Does he turn away a servant? he packs up his bundle,
and is gone; but 'tis no further than just out of his sight: the steps of old
age are so slow, the senses so troubled, that he will live and do his old
office in the same house a year together without being perceived.  And after a
fit interval of time, letters are pretended to come from a great way off; very
humble, suppliant; and full of promises of amendment, by virtue of which he is
again received into favour. Does Monsieur make any bargain, or prepare any
despatch that does not please? 'tis suppressed, and causes afterwards forged to
excuse the want of execution in the one or answer in the other. No letters
being first brought to him, he never sees any but those that shall seem fit for
his knowledge. If by accident they fall first into his own hand, being used to
trust somebody to read them to him; he reads extempore what he thinks fit, and
often makes such a one ask him pardon who abuses and rails at him in his
letter. In short, he sees nothing, but by an image prepared and designed
beforehand and the most satisfactory they can invent, not to rouse and awaken
his ill humour and choler. I have seen, under various aspects, enough of these
modes of domestic government, long-enduring, constant, to the like effect.
Women are evermore addicted to cross their husbands: they lay hold with both
hands on all occasions to contradict and oppose them; the first excuse serves
for a plenary justification. I have seen one who robbed her husband wholesale,
that, as she told her confessor, she might distribute the more liberal alms.
Let who will trust to that religious dispensation. No management of affairs
seems to them of sufficient dignity, if proceeding from the husband's assent;
they must usurp it either by insolence or cunning, and always injuriously, or
else it has not the grace and authority they desire. When, as in the case I am
speaking of, 'tis against a poor old man and for the children, then they make
use of this title to serve their passion with glory; and, as for a common
service, easily cabal, and combine against his government and dominion. If they
be males grown up in full and flourishing health, they presently corrupt,
either by force or favour, steward, receivers, and all the rout. Such as have
neither wife nor son do not so easily fall into this misfortune; but withal
more cruelly and unworthily. Cato the elder in his time said: So many servants,
so many enemies; consider, then, whether according to the vast difference
between the purity of the age he lived in and the corruption of this of ours,
he does not seem to shew us that wife, son, and servant, are so many enemies to
us? 'Tis well for old age that it is always accompanied by want of observation,
ignorance, and a proneness to being deceived. For should we see how we are used
and would not acquiesce, what would become of us? especially in such an age as
this, where the very judges who are to determine our controversies are usually
partisans to the young, and interested in the cause. In case the discovery of
this cheating escape me, I cannot at least fail to discern that I am very fit
to be cheated. And can a man ever enough exalt the value of a friend, in
comparison with these civil ties? The very image of it which I see in beasts,
so pure and uncorrupted, how religiously do I respect it! If others deceive me,
yet do I not, at least, deceive myself in thinking I am able to defend myself
from them, or in cudgelling my brains to make myself so. I protect myself from
such treasons in my own bosom, not by an unquiet and tumultuous curiosity, but
rather by diversion and resolution. When I hear talk of any one's condition, I
never trouble myself to think of him; I presently turn my eyes upon myself to
see in what condition I am; whatever concerns another relates to me; the
accident that has befallen him gives me caution, and rouses me to turn my
defence that way. We every day and every hour say things of another that we
might properly say of ourselves, could we but apply our observation to our own
concerns, as well as extend it to others. And several authors have in this
manner prejudiced their own cause by running headlong upon those they attack,
and darting those shafts against their enemies, that are more properly, and
with greater advantage, to be turned upon themselves.
