I have observed yet another sort of indiscretion in fathers of my time, that,
not contented with having deprived their children, during their own long lives,
of the share they naturally ought to have had in their fortunes, they
afterwards leave to their wives the same authority over their estates, and
liberty to dispose of them according to their own fancy. And I have known a
certain lord, one of the principal officers of the crown, who, having in
reversion above fifty thousand crowns yearly revenue, died necessitous and
overwhelmed with debt at above fifty years of age; his mother in her extremest
decrepitude being yet in possession of all his property by the will of his
father, who had, for his part, lived till near fourscore years old. This
appears to me by no means reasonable. And therefore I think it of very little
advantage to a man, whose affairs are well enough, to seek a wife who encumbers
his estate with a very great fortune; there is no sort of foreign debt that
brings more ruin to families than this: my predecessors have ever been aware of
that danger and provided against it, and so have I. But those who dissuade us
from rich wives, for fear they should be less tractable and kind, are out in
their advice to make a man lose a real commodity for so frivolous a conjecture.
It costs an unreasonable woman no more to pass over one reason than another;
they cherish themselves most where they are most wrong. Injustice allures them,
as the honour of their virtuous actions does the good; and the more riches they
bring with them, they are so much the more good-natured, as women, who are
handsome, are all the more inclined and proud to be chaste.  'Tis reasonable to
leave the administration of affairs to the mothers, till the children are old
enough, according to law, to manage them; but the father has brought them, up
very ill, if he cannot hope that, when they come to maturity, they will have
more wisdom and ability in the management of affairs than his wife, considering
the ordinary weakness of the sex. It were, notwithstanding, to say the truth,
more against nature to make the mothers depend upon the discretion of their
children; they ought to be plentifully provided for, to maintain themselves
according to their quality and age, by reason that necessity and indigence are
much more unbecoming and insupportable to them than to men; the son should
rather be cut short than the mother.  In general, the most judicious
distribution of our goods, when we come to die, is, in my opinion, to let them
be distributed according to the custom of the country; the laws have considered
the matter better than we know how to do, and 'tis wiser to let them fail in
their appointment, than rashly to run the hazard of miscarrying in ours. Nor
are the goods properly ours, since, by civil prescription and without us, they
are all destined to certain successors. And although we have some liberty
beyond that, yet I think we ought not, without great and manifest cause, to
take away that from one which his fortune has allotted him, and to which the
public equity gives him title; and that it is against reason to abuse this
liberty, in making it serve our own frivolous and private fancies. My destiny
has been kind to me in not presenting me with occasions to tempt me and divert
my affection from the common and legitimate institution. I see many with whom
'tis time lost to employ a long exercise of good offices: a word ill taken
obliterates ten years' merit; he is happy who is in a position to oil their
goodwill at this last passage. The last action carries it, not the best and
most frequent offices, but the most recent and present do the work. These are
people that play with their wills as with apples or rods, to gratify or
chastise every action of those who pretend to an interest in their care. 'Tis a
thing of too great weight and consequence to be so tumbled and tossed and
altered every moment, and wherein the wise determine once for all, having above
all things regard to reason and the public observance. We lay these masculine
substitutions too much to heart, proposing a ridiculous eternity to our names.
We are, moreover, too superstitious in vain conjectures as to the future, that
we derive from the words and actions of children. Peradventure they might have
done me an injustice, in dispossessing me of my right, for having been the most
dull and heavy, the most slow and unwilling at my book, not of all my brothers
only, but of all the boys in the whole province: whether about learning my
lesson, or about any bodily exercise. 'Tis a folly to make an election out of
the ordinary course upon the credit of these divinations wherein we are so
often deceived. If the ordinary rule of descent were to be violated, and the
destinies corrected in the choice they have made of our heirs, one might more
plausibly do it upon the account of some remarkable and enormous personal
deformity, a permanent and incorrigible defect, and in the opinion of us
French, who are great admirers of beauty, an important prejudice.
