To return to my subject: it appears to me that women are very rarely born, to
whom the prerogative over men, the maternal and natural excepted, is in any
sort due, unless it be for the punishment of such, as in some amorous fever
have voluntarily submitted themselves to them: but that in no way concerns the
old ones, of whom we are now speaking. This consideration it is which has made
us so willingly to enact and give force to that law, which was never yet seen
by any one, by which women are excluded the succession to our crown: and there
is hardly a government in the world where it is not pleaded, as it is here, by
the probability of reason that authorises it, though fortune has given it more
credit in some places than in others. 'Tis dangerous to leave the disposal of
our succession to their judgment, according to the choice they shall make of
children, which is often fantastic and unjust; for the irregular appetites and
depraved tastes they have during the time of their being with child, they have
at all other times in the mind. We commonly see them fond of the most weak,
ricketty, and deformed children; or of those, if they have such, as are still
hanging at the breast. For, not having sufficient force of reason to choose and
embrace that which is most worthy, they the more willingly suffer themselves to
be carried away, where the impressions of nature are most alone; like animals
that know their young no longer than they give them suck. As to the rest, it is
easy by experience to be discerned that this natural affection to which we give
so great authority has but very weak roots. For a very little profit, we every
day tear their own children out of the mothers' arms, and make them take ours
in their room: we make them abandon their own to some pitiful nurse, to whom we
disdain to commit ours, or to some she-goat, forbidding them, not only to give
them suck, what danger soever they run thereby, but, moreover, to take any
manner of care of them, that they may wholly be occupied with the care of and
attendance upon ours; and we see in most of them an adulterate affection, more
vehement than the natural, begotten by custom toward the foster children, and a
greater solicitude for the preservation of those they have taken charge of,
than of their own. And that which I was saying of goats was upon this account;
that it is ordinary all about where I live, to see the countrywomen, when they
want milk of their own for their children, to call goats to their assistance;
and I have at this hour two men-servants that never sucked women's milk more
than eight days after they were born. These goats are immediately taught to
come to suckle the little children, know their voices when they cry, and come
running to them. If any other than this foster-child be presented to them, they
refuse to let it suck; and the child in like manner will refuse to suck another
goat. I saw one the other day from whom they had taken away the goat that used
to nourish it, by reason the father had only borrowed it of a neighbour; the
child would not touch any other they could bring, and died, doubtless of
hunger. Beasts as easily alter and corrupt their natural affection as we: I
believe that in what Herodotus relates of a certain district of Lybia, there
are many mistakes; he says that the women are there in common; but that the
child, so soon as it can go, finds him out in the crowd for his father, to whom
he is first led by his natural inclination.
