Now, to consider this simple reason for loving our children, that we have begot
them, therefore calling them our second selves, it appears, methinks, that
there is another kind of production proceeding from us, that is of no less
recommendation: for that which we engender by the soul, the issue of our
understanding, courage, and abilities, springs from nobler parts than those of
the body, and that are much more our own: we are both father and mother in this
generation. These cost us a great deal more and bring us more honour, if they
have anything of good in them. For the value of our other children is much more
theirs than ours; the share we have in them is very little; but of these all
the beauty, all the grace and value, are ours; and also they more vividly
represent us than the others. Plato adds, that these are immortal children that
immortalise and deify their fathers, as Lycurgus, Solon, Minos. Now, histories
being full of examples of the common affection of fathers to their children, it
seems not altogether improper to introduce some few of this other kind.
Heliodorus, that good bishop of Trikka, rather chose to lose the dignity,
profit, and devotion of so venerable a prelacy, than to lose his daughter; a
daughter that continues to this day very graceful and comely; but,
peradventure, a little too curiously and wantonly tricked, and too amorous for
an ecclesiastical and sacerdotal daughter. There was one Labienus at Rome, a
man of great worth and authority, and amongst other qualities excellent in all
sorts of literature, who was, as I take it, the son of that great Labienus, the
chief of Caesar's captains in the wars of Gaul; and who, afterwards, siding
with Pompey the great, so valiantly maintained his cause, till he was by Caesar
defeated in Spain. This Labienus, of whom I am now speaking, had several
enemies, envious of his good qualities, and, tis likely, the courtiers and
minions of the emperors of his time who were very angry at his freedom and the
paternal humour which he yet retained against tyranny, with which it is to be
supposed he had tinctured his books and writings. His adversaries prosecuted
several pieces he had published before the magistrates at Rome, and prevailed
so far against him, as to have them condemned to the fire. It was in him that
this new example of punishment was begun, which was afterwards continued
against others at Rome, to punish even writing and studies with death. There
would not be means and matter enough of cruelty, did we not mix with them
things that nature has exempted from all sense and suffering, as reputation and
the products of the mind, and did we not communicate corporal punishments to
the teachings and monuments of the Muses. Now, Labienus could not suffer this
loss, nor survive these his so dear issue, and therefore caused himself to be
conveyed and shut up alive in the monument of his ancestors, where he made
shift to kill and bury himself at once. 'Tis hard to shew a more vehement
paternal affection than this. Cassius Severus, a man of great eloquence and his
very intimate friend, seeing his books burned, cried out that by the same
sentence they should as well condemn him to the fire too, seeing that he
carried in his memory all that they contained. The like accident befel
Cremutius Cordus, who being accused of having in his books commended Brutus and
Cassius, that dirty, servile, and corrupt Senate, worthy a worse master than
Tiberius, condemned his writings to the flame. He was willing to bear them
company, and killed himself with fasting. The good Lucan, being condemned by
that rascal Nero, at the last gasp of his life, when the greater part of his
blood was already spent through the veins of his arms, which he had caused his
physician to open to make him die, and when the cold had seized upon all his
extremities, and began to approach his vital parts, the last thing he had in
his memory was some of the verses of his Battle of Phaysalia, which he recited,
dying with them in his mouth. What was this, but taking a tender and paternal
leave of his children, in imitation of the valedictions and embraces, wherewith
we part from ours, when we come to die, and an effect of that natural
inclination, that suggests to our remembrance in this extremity those things
which were dearest to us during the time of our life?
