I make no doubt but that I often happen to speak of things that are much better
and more truly handled by those who are masters of the trade. You have here
purely an essay of my natural parts, and not of those acquired: and whoever
shall catch me tripping in ignorance, will not in any sort get the better of
me; for I should be very unwilling to become responsible to another for my
writings, who am not so to myself, nor satisfied with them. Whoever goes in
quest of knowledge, let him fish for it where it is to be found; there is
nothing I so little profess. These are fancies of my own, by which I do not
pretend to discover things but to lay open myself; they may, peradventure, one
day be known to me, or have formerly been, according as fortune has been able
to bring me in place where they have been explained; but I have utterly
forgotten it; and if I am a man of some reading, I am a man of no retention; so
that I can promise no certainty, more than to make known to what point the
knowledge I now have has risen. Therefore, let none lay stress upon the matter
I write, but upon my method in writing it. Let them observe, in what I borrow,
if I have known how to choose what is proper to raise or help the invention,
which is always my own. For I make others say for me, not before but after me,
what, either for want of language or want of sense, I cannot myself so well
express. I do not number my borrowings, I weigh them; and had I designed to
raise their value by number, I had made them twice as many; they are all, or
within a very few, so famed and ancient authors, that they seem, methinks,
themselves sufficiently to tell who they are, without giving me the trouble. In
reasons, comparisons, and arguments, if I transplant any into my own soil, and
confound them amongst my own, I purposely conceal the author, to awe the
temerity of those precipitate censors who fall upon all sorts of writings,
particularly the late ones, of men yet living; and in the vulgar tongue which
puts every one into a capacity of criticising and which seem to convict the
conception and design as vulgar also. I will have them give Plutarch a fillip
on my nose, and rail against Seneca when they think they rail at me. I must
shelter my own weakness under these great reputations. I shall love any one
that can unplume me, that is, by clearness of understanding and judgment, and
by the sole distinction of the force and beauty of the discourse. For I who,
for want of memory, am at every turn at a loss to, pick them out of their
national livery, am yet wise enough to know, by the measure of my own
abilities, that my soil is incapable of producing any of those rich flowers
that I there find growing; and that all the fruits of my own growth are not
worth any one of them. For this, indeed, I hold myself responsible; if I get in
my own way; if there be any vanity and defect in my writings which I do not of
myself perceive nor can discern, when pointed out to me by another; for many
faults escape our eye, but the infirmity of judgment consists in not being able
to discern them, when by another laid open to us. Knowledge and truth may be in
us without judgment, and judgment also without them; but the confession of
ignorance is one of the finest and surest testimonies of judgment that I know.
I have no other officer to put my writings in rank and file, but only fortune.
As things come into my head, I heap them one upon another; sometimes they
advance in whole bodies, sometimes in single file. I would that every one
should see my natural and ordinary pace, irregular as it is; I suffer myself to
jog on at my own rate. Neither are these subjects which a man is not permitted
to be ignorant in, or casually and at a venture, to discourse of. I could wish
to have a more perfect knowledge of things, but I will not buy it so dear as it
costs. My design is to pass over easily, and not laboriously, the remainder of
my life; there is nothing that I will cudgel my brains about; no, not even
knowledge, of what value soever.
