I do not bite my nails about the difficulties I meet with in my reading; after
a charge or two, I give them over. Should I insist upon them, I should both
lose myself and time; for I have an impatient understanding, that must be
satisfied at first: what I do not discern at once is by persistence rendered
more obscure. I do nothing without gaiety; continuation and a too obstinate
endeavour, darkens, stupefies, and tires my judgment. My sight is confounded
and dissipated with poring; I must withdraw it, and refer my discovery to new
attempts; just as, to judge rightly of the lustre of scarlet, we are taught to
pass the eye lightly over it, and again to run it over at several sudden and
reiterated glances. If one book do not please me, I take another; and I never
meddle with any, but at such times as I am weary of doing nothing. I care not
much for new ones, because the old seem fuller and stronger; neither do I
converse much with Greek authors, because my judgment cannot do its work with
imperfect intelligence of the material.  Amongst books that are simply
pleasant, of the moderns, Boccaccio's Decameron, Rabelais, and the Basia of
Johannes Secundus (if those may be ranged under the title) are worth reading
for amusement. As to the Amadis, and such kind of stuff, they had not the
credit of arresting even my childhood. And I will, moreover, say, whether
boldly or rashly, that this old, heavy soul of mine is now no longer tickled
with Ariosto, no, nor with the worthy Ovid; his facility and inventions, with
which I was formerly so ravished, are now of no more relish, and I can hardly
have the patience to read them. I speak my opinion freely of all things, even
of those that, perhaps, exceed my capacity, and that I do not conceive to be,
in any wise, under my jurisdiction. And, accordingly, the judgment I deliver,
is to show the measure of my own sight, and not of the things I make so bold to
criticise. When I find myself disgusted with Plato's 'Axiochus', as with a
work, with due respect to such an author be it spoken, without force, my
judgment does not believe itself: it is not so arrogant as to oppose the
authority of so many other famous judgments of antiquity, which it considers as
its tutors and masters, and with whom it is rather content to err; in such a
case, it condemns itself either to stop at the outward bark, not being able to
penetrate to the heart, or to consider it by sortie false light. It is content
with only securing itself from trouble and disorder; as to its own weakness, it
frankly acknowledges and confesses it. It thinks it gives a just interpretation
to the appearances by its conceptions presented to it; but they are weak and
imperfect. Most of the fables of AEsop have diverse senses and meanings, of
which the mythologists chose some one that quadrates well to the fable; but,
for the most part, 'tis but the first face that presents itself and is
superficial only; there yet remain others more vivid, essential, and profound,
into which they have not been able to penetrate; and just so 'tis with me.
But, to pursue the business of this essay, I have always thought that, in
poesy, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus, and Horace by many degrees excel the rest;
and signally, Virgil in his Georgics, which I look upon as the most
accomplished piece in poetry; and in comparison of which a man may easily
discern that there are some places in his AEneids, to which the author would
have given a little more of the file, had he had leisure: and the fifth book of
his AEneids seems to me the most perfect. I also love Lucan, and willingly read
him, not so much for his style, as for his own worth, and the truth and
solidity of his opinions and judgments. As for good Terence, the refined
elegance and grace of the Latin tongue, I find him admirable in his vivid
representation of our manners and the movements of the soul; our actions throw
me at every turn upon him; and I cannot read him so often that I do not still
discover some new grace and beauty. Such as lived near Virgil's time complained
that some should compare Lucretius to him. I am of opinion that the comparison
is, in truth, very unequal: a belief that, nevertheless, I have much ado to
assure myself in, when I come upon some excellent passage in Lucretius. But if
they were so angry at this comparison, what would they say to the brutish and
barbarous stupidity of those who, nowadays, compare him with Ariosto? Would not
Ariosto himself say?
