As to Cicero, his works that are most useful to my design are they that treat
of manners and rules of our life. But boldly to confess the truth (for since
one has passed the barriers of impudence, there is no bridle), his way of
writing appears to me negligent and uninviting: for his prefaces, definitions,
divisions, and etymologies take up the greatest part of his work: whatever
there is of life and marrow is smothered and lost in the long preparation. When
I have spent an hour in reading him, which is a great deal for me, and try to
recollect what I have thence extracted of juice and substance, for the most
part I find nothing but wind; for he is not yet come to the arguments that
serve to his purpose, and to the reasons that properly help to form the knot I
seek. For me, who only desire to become more wise, not more learned or
eloquent, these logical and Aristotelian dispositions of parts are of no use. I
would have a man begin with the main proposition. I know well enough what death
and pleasure are; let no man give himself the trouble to anatomise them to me.
I look for good and solid reasons, at the first dash, to instruct me how to
stand their shock, for which purpose neither grammatical subtleties nor the
quaint contexture of words and argumentations are of any use at all. I am for
discourses that give the first charge into the heart of the redoubt; his
languish about the subject; they are proper for the schools, for the bar, and
for the pulpit, where we have leisure to nod, and may awake, a quarter of an
hour after, time enough to find again the thread of the discourse. It is
necessary to speak after this manner to judges, whom a man has a design to gain
over, right or wrong, to children and common people, to whom a man must say
all, and see what will come of it. I would not have an author make it his
business to render me attentive: or that he should cry out fifty times Oyez! as
the heralds do. The Romans, in their religious exercises, began with 'Hoc age'
as we in ours do with 'Sursum corda'; these are so many words lost to me: I
come already fully prepared from my chamber. I need no allurement, no
invitation, no sauce; I eat the meat raw, so that, instead of whetting my
appetite by these preparatives, they tire and pall it. Will the licence of the
time excuse my sacrilegious boldness if I censure the dialogism of Plato
himself as also dull and heavy, too much stifling the matter, and lament so
much time lost by a man, who had so many better things to say, in so many long
and needless preliminary interlocutions? My ignorance will better excuse me in
that I understand not Greek so well as to discern the beauty of his language. I
generally choose books that use sciences, not such as only lead to them. The
two first, and Pliny, and their like, have nothing of this Hoc age; they will
have to do with men already instructed; or if they have, 'tis a substantial Hoc
age; and that has a body by itself. I also delight in reading the Epistles to
Atticus, not only because they contain a great deal of the history and affairs
of his time, but much more because I therein discover much of his own private
humours; for I have a singular curiosity, as I have said elsewhere, to pry into
the souls and the natural and true opinions of the authors, with whom I
converse. A man may indeed judge of their parts, but not of their manners nor
of themselves, by the writings they exhibit upon the theatre of the world. I
have a thousand times lamented the loss of the treatise Brutus wrote upon
Virtue, for it is well to learn the theory from those who best know the
practice.
