Every death ought to hold proportion with the life before it; we do not become
others for dying. I always interpret the death by the life preceding; and if
any one tell me of a death strong and constant in appearance, annexed to a
feeble life, I conclude it produced by some feeble cause, and suitable to the
life before. The easiness then of his death and the facility of dying he had
acquired by the vigour of his soul; shall we say that it ought to abate
anything of the lustre of his virtue? And who, that has his brain never so
little tinctured with the true philosophy, can be content to imagine Socrates
only free from fear and passion in the accident of his prison, fetters, and
condemnation? and that will not discover in him not only firmness and constancy
(which was his ordinary condition), but, moreover, I know not what new
satisfaction, and a frolic cheerfulness in his last words and actions? In the
start he gave with the pleasure of scratching his leg when his irons were taken
off, does he not discover an equal serenity and joy in his soul for being freed
from past inconveniences, and at the same time to enter into the knowledge of
the things to come? Cato shall pardon me, if he please; his death indeed is
more tragical and more lingering; but yet this is, I know not how, methinks,
finer. Aristippus, to one that was lamenting this death: "The gods grant me
such an one," said he. A man discerns in the soul of these two great men and
their imitators (for I very much doubt whether there were ever their equals) so
perfect a habitude to virtue, that it was turned to a complexion. It is no
longer a laborious virtue, nor the precepts of reason, to maintain which the
soul is so racked, but the very essence of their soul, its natural and ordinary
habit; they have rendered it such by a long practice of philosophical precepts
having lit upon a rich and fine nature; the vicious passions that spring in us
can find no entrance into them; the force and vigour of their soul stifle and
extinguish irregular desires, so soon as they begin to move.  Now, that it is
not more noble, by a high and divine resolution, to hinder the birth of
temptations, and to be so formed to virtue, that the very seeds of vice are
rooted out, than to hinder by main force their progress; and, having suffered
ourselves to be surprised with the first motions of the passions, to arm
ourselves and to stand firm to oppose their progress, and overcome them; and
that this second effect is not also much more generous than to be simply
endowed with a facile and affable nature, of itself disaffected to debauchery
and vice, I do not think can be doubted; for this third and last sort of virtue
seems to render a man innocent, but not virtuous; free from doing ill, but not
apt enough to do well: considering also, that this condition is so near
neighbour to imperfection and cowardice, that I know not very well how to
separate the confines and distinguish them: the very names of goodness and
innocence are, for this reason, in some sort grown into contempt. I very well
know that several virtues, as chastity, sobriety, and temperance, may come to a
man through personal defects. Constancy in danger, if it must be so called, the
contempt of death, and patience in misfortunes, may ofttimes be found in men
for want of well judging of such accidents, and not apprehending them for such
as they are. Want of apprehension and stupidity sometimes counterfeit virtuous
effects as I have often seen it happen, that men have been commended for what
really merited blame. An Italian lord once said this, in my presence, to the
disadvantage of his own nation: that the subtlety of the Italians, and the
vivacity of their conceptions were so great, and they foresaw the dangers and
accidents that might befall them so far off, that it was not to be thought
strange, if they were often, in war, observed to provide for their safety, even
before they had discovered the peril; that we French and the Spaniards, who
were not so cunning, went on further, and that we must be made to see and feel
the danger before we would take the alarm; but that even then we could not
stick to it. But the Germans and Swiss, more gross and heavy, had not the sense
to look about them, even when the blows were falling about their ears.
