By this way the reputation of divining fables is acquired. There is no
fortune-teller, if we have this authority, but, if a man will take the pains to
tumble and toss, and narrowly to peep into all the folds and glosses of his
words, he may make him, like the Sibyls, say what he will. There are so many
ways of interpretation that it will be hard but that, either obliquely or in a
direct line, an ingenious wit will find out, in every subject, some air that
will serve for his purpose; therefore we find a cloudy and ambiguous style in
so frequent and ancient use. Let the author but make himself master of that, to
busy posterity about his predictions, which not only his own parts, but the
accidental favour of the matter itself, may do for him; and, as to the rest,
express himself, whether after a foolish or a subtle manner, somewhat obscurely
or contradictorily, 'tis no matter;—a number of wits, shaking and sifting him,
will bring out a great many several forms, either according to his meaning, or
collateral, or contrary, to it, which will all redound to his honour; he will
see himself enriched by the means of his disciples, like the regents of
colleges by their pupils yearly presents. This it is which has given reputation
to many things of no worth at all; that has brought several writings in vogue,
and given them the fame of containing all sorts of matter can be desired; one
and the same thing receiving a thousand and a thousand images and various
considerations; nay, as many as we please.  Is it possible that Homer could
design to say all that we make him say, and that he designed so many and so
various figures, as that the divines, law-givers, captains, philosophers, and
all sorts of men who treat of sciences, how variously and opposite soever,
should indifferently quote him, and support their arguments by his authority,
as the sovereign lord and master of all offices, works, and artisans, and
counsellor-general of all enterprises? Whoever has had occasion for oracles and
predictions has there found sufficient to serve his turn. 'Tis a wonder how
many and how admirable concurrences an intelligent person, and a particular
friend of mine, has there found out in favour of our religion; and cannot
easily be put out of the conceit that it was Homer's design; and yet he is as
well acquainted with this author as any man whatever of his time. And what he
has found in favour of our religion there, very many anciently have found in
favour of theirs. Do but observe how Plato is tumbled and tossed about; every
one ennobling his own opinions by applying him to himself, and making him take
what side they please. They draw him in, and engage him in all the new opinions
the world receives; and make him, according to the different course of things,
differ from himself; every one makes him disavow, according to his own sense,
the manners and customs lawful in his age, because they are unlawful in ours;
and all this with vivacity and power, according to the force and sprightliness
of the wit of the interpreter. From the same foundation that Heraclitus and
this sentence of his had, "that all things had in them those forms that we
discern," Democritus drew quite a contrary conclusion,—"that objects have in
them nothing that we discern in them;" and because honey is sweet to one and
bitter to another, he thence argued that it was neither sweet nor bitter. The
Pyrrhonians would say that they knew not whether it is sweet or bitter, or
whether the one or the other, or both; for these always gained the highest
point of dubitation. The Cyrenaics held that nothing was perceptible from
without, and that that only was perceptible that inwardly touched us, as pain
and pleasure; acknowledging neither sound nor colour, but certain affections
only that we receive from them; and that man's judgment had no other seat
Protagoras believed that "what seems true to every one, is true to every one."
The Epicureans lodged all judgment in the senses, and in the knowledge of
things, and in pleasure. Plato would have the judgment of truth, and truth
itself, derived from opinions and the senses, to belong to the wit and
cogitation.
