Even the town itself resumed by degrees its ordinary aspect. The French seldom
walked abroad, but the streets swarmed with Prussian soldiers. Moreover, the
officers of the Blue Hussars, who arrogantly dragged their instruments of death
along the pavements, seemed to hold the simple townsmen in but little more
contempt than did the French cavalry officers who had drunk at the same cafes
the year before.

But there was something in the air, a something strange and subtle, an
intolerable foreign atmosphere like a penetrating odor—the odor of invasion. It
permeated dwellings and places of public resort, changed the taste of food,
made one imagine one's self in far-distant lands, amid dangerous, barbaric
tribes.

The conquerors exacted money, much money. The inhabitants paid what was asked;
they were rich. But, the wealthier a Norman tradesman becomes, the more he
suffers at having to part with anything that belongs to him, at having to see
any portion of his substance pass into the hands of another.

Nevertheless, within six or seven miles of the town, along the course of the
river as it flows onward to Croisset, Dieppedalle and Biessart, boat-men and
fishermen often hauled to the surface of the water the body of a German,
bloated in his uniform, killed by a blow from knife or club, his head crushed
by a stone, or perchance pushed from some bridge into the stream below. The mud
of the river-bed swallowed up these obscure acts of vengeance—savage, yet
legitimate; these unrecorded deeds of bravery; these silent attacks fraught
with greater danger than battles fought in broad day, and surrounded, moreover,
with no halo of romance. For hatred of the foreigner ever arms a few intrepid
souls, ready to die for an idea.

At last, as the invaders, though subjecting the town to the strictest
discipline, had not committed any of the deeds of horror with which they had
been credited while on their triumphal march, the people grew bolder, and the
necessities of business again animated the breasts of the local merchants. Some
of these had important commercial interests at Havre —occupied at present by
the French army—and wished to attempt to reach that port by overland route to
Dieppe, taking the boat from there.

Through the influence of the German officers whose acquaintance they had made,
they obtained a permit to leave town from the general in command.

A large four-horse coach having, therefore, been engaged for the journey, and
ten passengers having given in their names to the proprietor, they decided to
start on a certain Tuesday morning before daybreak, to avoid attracting a
crowd.

The ground had been frozen hard for some time-past, and about three o'clock on
Monday afternoon—large black clouds from the north shed their burden of snow
uninterruptedly all through that evening and night.

At half-past four in the morning the travellers met in the courtyard of the
Hotel de Normandie, where they were to take their seats in the coach.
