This did not seem to have occurred to them, and they at once took his advice.
The three men seated their wives at the far end of the coach, then got in
themselves; lastly the other vague, snow-shrouded forms clambered to the
remaining places without a word.

The floor was covered with straw, into which the feet sank. The ladies at the
far end, having brought with them little copper foot-warmers heated by means of
a kind of chemical fuel, proceeded to light these, and spent some time in
expatiating in low tones on their advantages, saying over and over again things
which they had all known for a long time.

At last, six horses instead of four having been harnessed to the diligence, on
account of the heavy roads, a voice outside asked: "Is every one there?" To
which a voice from the interior replied: "Yes," and they set out.

The vehicle moved slowly, slowly, at a snail's pace; the wheels sank into the
snow; the entire body of the coach creaked and groaned; the horses slipped,
puffed, steamed, and the coachman's long whip cracked incessantly, flying
hither and thither, coiling up, then flinging out its length like a slender
serpent, as it lashed some rounded flank, which instantly grew tense as it
strained in further effort.

But the day grew apace. Those light flakes which one traveller, a native of
Rouen, had compared to a rain of cotton fell no longer. A murky light filtered
through dark, heavy clouds, which made the country more dazzlingly white by
contrast, a whiteness broken sometimes by a row of tall trees spangled with
hoarfrost, or by a cottage roof hooded in snow.

Within the coach the passengers eyed one another curiously in the dim light of
dawn.

Right at the back, in the best seats of all, Monsieur and Madame Loiseau,
wholesale wine merchants of the Rue Grand-Pont, slumbered opposite each other.
Formerly clerk to a merchant who had failed in business, Loiseau had bought his
master's interest, and made a fortune for himself. He sold very bad wine at a
very low price to the retail-dealers in the country, and had the reputation,
among his friends and acquaintances, of being a shrewd rascal a true Norman,
full of quips and wiles. So well established was his character as a cheat that,
in the mouths of the citizens of Rouen, the very name of Loiseau became a
byword for sharp practice.

Above and beyond this, Loiseau was noted for his practical jokes of every
description—his tricks, good or ill-natured; and no one could mention his name
without adding at once: "He's an extraordinary man—Loiseau." He was undersized
and potbellied, had a florid face with grayish whiskers.

His wife-tall, strong, determined, with a loud voice and decided manner
—represented the spirit of order and arithmetic in the business house which
Loiseau enlivened by his jovial activity.

Beside them, dignified in bearing, belonging to a superior caste, sat Monsieur
Carre-Lamadon, a man of considerable importance, a king in the cotton trade,
proprietor of three spinning-mills, officer of the Legion of Honor, and member
of the General Council. During the whole time the Empire was in the ascendancy
he remained the chief of the well-disposed Opposition, merely in order to
command a higher value for his devotion when he should rally to the cause which
he meanwhile opposed with "courteous weapons," to use his own expression.

Madame Carre-Lamadon, much younger than her husband, was the consolation of all
the officers of good family quartered at Rouen. Pretty, slender, graceful, she
sat opposite her husband, curled up in her furs, and gazing mournfully at the
sorry interior of the coach.
