Then Boule le Suif, in low, humble tones, invited the nuns to partake of her
repast. They both accepted the offer unhesitatingly, and after a few stammered
words of thanks began to eat quickly, without raising their eyes. Neither did
Cornudet refuse his neighbor's offer, and, in combination with the nuns, a sort
of table was formed by opening out the newspaper over the four pairs of knees.

Mouths kept opening and shutting, ferociously masticating and devouring the
food. Loiseau, in his corner, was hard at work, and in low tones urged his wife
to follow his example. She held out for a long time, but overstrained Nature
gave way at last. Her husband, assuming his politest manner, asked their
"charming companion" if he might be allowed to offer Madame Loiseau a small
helping.

"Why, certainly, sir," she replied, with an amiable smile, holding out the
dish.

When the first bottle of claret was opened some embarrassment was caused by the
fact that there was only one drinking cup, but this was passed from one to
another, after being wiped. Cornudet alone, doubtless in a spirit of gallantry,
raised to his own lips that part of the rim which was still moist from those of
his fair neighbor.

Then, surrounded by people who were eating, and well-nigh suffocated by the
odor of food, the Comte and Comtesse de Breville and Monsieur and Madame
Carre-Lamadon endured that hateful form of torture which has perpetuated the
name of Tantalus. All at once the manufacturer's young wife heaved a sigh which
made every one turn and look at her; she was white as the snow without; her
eyes closed, her head fell forward; she had fainted. Her husband, beside
himself, implored the help of his neighbors. No one seemed to know what to do
until the elder of the two nuns, raising the patient's head, placed Boule de
Suif's drinking cup to her lips, and made her swallow a few drops of wine. The
pretty invalid moved, opened her eyes, smiled, and declared in a feeble voice
that she was all right again. But, to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophe,
the nun made her drink a cupful of claret, adding: "It's just hunger —that's
what is wrong with you."

Then Boule de Suif, blushing and embarrassed, stammered, looking at the four
passengers who were still fasting:

"'Mon Dieu', if I might offer these ladies and gentlemen——"

She stopped short, fearing a snub. But Loiseau continued:

"Hang it all, in such a case as this we are all brothers and sisters and ought
to assist each other. Come, come, ladies, don't stand on ceremony, for
goodness' sake! Do we even know whether we shall find a house in which to pass
the night? At our present rate of going we sha'n't be at Totes till midday
to-morrow."
