The basket was empty. The ten people had finished its contents without
difficulty amid general regret that it did not hold more. Conversation went on
a little longer, though it flagged somewhat after the passengers had finished
eating.

Night fell, the darkness grew deeper and deeper, and the cold made Boule de
Suif shiver, in spite of her plumpness. So Madame de Breville offered her her
foot-warmer, the fuel of which had been several times renewed since the
morning, and she accepted the offer at once, for her feet were icy cold.
Mesdames Carre-Lamadon and Loiseau gave theirs to the nuns.

The driver lighted his lanterns. They cast a bright gleam on a cloud of vapor
which hovered over the sweating flanks of the horses, and on the roadside snow,
which seemed to unroll as they went along in the changing light of the lamps.

All was now indistinguishable in the coach; but suddenly a movement occurred in
the corner occupied by Boule de Suif and Cornudet; and Loiseau, peering into
the gloom, fancied he saw the big, bearded democrat move hastily to one side,
as if he had received a well-directed, though noiseless, blow in the dark.

Tiny lights glimmered ahead. It was Totes. The coach had been on the road
eleven hours, which, with the three hours allotted the horses in four periods
for feeding and breathing, made fourteen. It entered the town, and stopped
before the Hotel du Commerce.

The coach door opened; a well-known noise made all the travellers start; it was
the clanging of a scabbard, on the pavement; then a voice called out something
in German.

Although the coach had come to a standstill, no one got out; it looked as if
they were afraid of being murdered the moment they left their seats. Thereupon
the driver appeared, holding in his hand one of his lanterns, which cast a
sudden glow on the interior of the coach, lighting up the double row of
startled faces, mouths agape, and eyes wide open in surprise and terror.

Beside the driver stood in the full light a German officer, a tall young man,
fair and slender, tightly encased in his uniform like a woman in her corset,
his flat shiny cap, tilted to one side of his head, making him look like an
English hotel runner. His exaggerated mustache, long and straight and tapering
to a point at either end in a single blond hair that could hardly be seen,
seemed to weigh down the corners of his mouth and give a droop to his lips.

In Alsatian French he requested the travellers to alight, saying stiffly:

"Kindly get down, ladies and gentlemen."

The two nuns were the first to obey, manifesting the docility of holy women
accustomed to submission on every occasion. Next appeared the count and
countess, followed by the manufacturer and his wife, after whom came Loiseau,
pushing his larger and better half before him.

"Good-day, sir," he said to the officer as he put his foot to the ground,
acting on an impulse born of prudence rather than of politeness. The other,
insolent like all in authority, merely stared without replying.
