Then they took their places round a high soup tureen, from which issued an odor
of cabbage. In spite of this coincidence, the supper was cheerful. The cider
was good; the Loiseaus and the nuns drank it from motives of economy. The
others ordered wine; Cornudet demanded beer. He had his own fashion of
uncorking the bottle and making the beer foam, gazing at it as he inclined his
glass and then raised it to a position between the lamp and his eye that he
might judge of its color. When he drank, his great beard, which matched the
color of his favorite beverage, seemed to tremble with affection; his eyes
positively squinted in the endeavor not to lose sight of the beloved glass, and
he looked for all the world as if he were fulfilling the only function for
which he was born. He seemed to have established in his mind an affinity
between the two great passions of his life—pale ale and revolution—and
assuredly he could not taste the one without dreaming of the other.

Monsieur and Madame Follenvie dined at the end of the table. The man, wheezing
like a broken-down locomotive, was too short-winded to talk when he was eating.
But the wife was not silent a moment; she told how the Prussians had impressed
her on their arrival, what they did, what they said; execrating them in the
first place because they cost her money, and in the second because she had two
sons in the army. She addressed herself principally to the countess, flattered
at the opportunity of talking to a lady of quality.

Then she lowered her voice, and began to broach delicate subjects. Her husband
interrupted her from time to time, saying:

"You would do well to hold your tongue, Madame Follenvie."

But she took no notice of him, and went on:

"Yes, madame, these Germans do nothing but eat potatoes and pork, and then pork
and potatoes. And don't imagine for a moment that they are clean! No, indeed!
And if only you saw them drilling for hours, indeed for days, together; they
all collect in a field, then they do nothing but march backward and forward,
and wheel this way and that. If only they would cultivate the land, or remain
at home and work on their high roads! Really, madame, these soldiers are of no
earthly use! Poor people have to feed and keep them, only in order that they
may learn how to kill! True, I am only an old woman with no education, but when
I see them wearing themselves out marching about from morning till night, I say
to myself: When there are people who make discoveries that are of use to
people, why should others take so much trouble to do harm? Really, now, isn't
it a terrible thing to kill people, whether they are Prussians, or English, or
Poles, or French? If we revenge ourselves on any one who injures us we do
wrong, and are punished for it; but when our sons are shot down like
partridges, that is all right, and decorations are given to the man who kills
the most. No, indeed, I shall never be able to understand it."

Cornudet raised his voice:

"War is a barbarous proceeding when we attack a peaceful neighbor, but it is a
sacred duty when undertaken in defence of one's country."

The old woman looked down:

"Yes; it's another matter when one acts in self-defence; but would it not be
better to kill all the kings, seeing that they make war just to amuse
themselves?"
