e neighborhood of the enemy, must have roused his dormant dignity, for after
bestowing on her a simple kiss he crept softly back to his room. Loiseau, much
edified, capered round the bedroom before taking his place beside his
slumbering spouse.

Then silence reigned throughout the house. But soon there arose from some
remote part—it might easily have been either cellar or attic—a stertorous,
monotonous, regular snoring, a dull, prolonged rumbling, varied by tremors like
those of a boiler under pressure of steam. Monsieur Follenvie had gone to
sleep.

As they had decided on starting at eight o'clock the next morning, every one
was in the kitchen at that hour; but the coach, its roof covered with snow,
stood by itself in the middle of the yard, without either horses or driver.
They sought the latter in the stables, coach-houses and barns —but in vain. So
the men of the party resolved to scour the country for him, and sallied forth.
They found them selves in the square, with the church at the farther side, and
to right and left low-roofed houses where there were some Prussian soldiers.
The first soldier they saw was peeling potatoes. The second, farther on, was
washing out a barber's shop. An other, bearded to the eyes, was fondling a
crying infant, and dandling it on his knees to quiet it; and the stout peasant
women, whose men-folk were for the most part at the war, were, by means of
signs, telling their obedient conquerors what work they were to do: chop wood,
prepare soup, grind coffee; one of them even was doing the washing for his
hostess, an infirm old grandmother.

The count, astonished at what he saw, questioned the beadle who was coming out
of the presbytery. The old man answered:

"Oh, those men are not at all a bad sort; they are not Prussians, I am told;
they come from somewhere farther off, I don't exactly know where. And they have
all left wives and children behind them; they are not fond of war either, you
may be sure! I am sure they are mourning for the men where they come from, just
as we do here; and the war causes them just as much unhappiness as it does us.
As a matter of fact, things are not so very bad here just now, because the
soldiers do no harm, and work just as if they were in their own homes. You see,
sir, poor folk always help one another; it is the great ones of this world who
make war."

Cornudet indignant at the friendly understanding established between conquerors
and conquered, withdrew, preferring to shut himself up in the inn.

"They are repeopling the country," jested Loiseau.

"They are undoing the harm they have done," said Monsieur Carre-Lamadon
gravely.

But they could not find the coach driver. At last he was discovered in the
village cafe, fraternizing cordially with the officer's orderly.
