The afternoon was wretched. They could not understand the caprice of this
German, and the strangest ideas came into their heads. They all congregated in
the kitchen, and talked the subject to death, imagining all kinds of unlikely
things. Perhaps they were to be kept as hostages —but for what reason? or to be
extradited as prisoners of war? or possibly they were to be held for ransom?
They were panic-stricken at this last supposition. The richest among them were
the most alarmed, seeing themselves forced to empty bags of gold into the
insolent soldier's hands in order to buy back their lives. They racked their
brains for plausible lies whereby they might conceal the fact that they were
rich, and pass themselves off as poor—very poor. Loiseau took off his watch
chain, and put it in his pocket. The approach of night increased their
apprehension. The lamp was lighted, and as it wanted yet two hours to dinner
Madame Loiseau proposed a game of trente et un. It would distract their
thoughts. The rest agreed, and Cornudet himself joined the party, first putting
out his pipe for politeness' sake.

The count shuffled the cards—dealt—and Boule de Suif had thirty-one to start
with; soon the interest of the game assuaged the anxiety of the players. But
Cornudet noticed that Loiseau and his wife were in league to cheat.

They were about to sit down to dinner when Monsieur Follenvie appeared, and in
his grating voice announced:

"The Prussian officer sends to ask Mademoiselle Elisabeth Rousset if she has
changed her mind yet."

Boule de Suif stood still, pale as death. Then, suddenly turning crimson with
anger, she gasped out:

"Kindly tell that scoundrel, that cur, that carrion of a Prussian, that I will
never consent—you understand?—never, never, never!"

The fat innkeeper left the room. Then Boule de Suif was surrounded, questioned,
entreated on all sides to reveal the mystery of her visit to the officer. She
refused at first; but her wrath soon got the better of her.

"What does he want? He wants to make me his mistress!" she cried.

No one was shocked at the word, so great was the general indignation. Cornudet
broke his jug as he banged it down on the table. A loud outcry arose against
this base soldier. All were furious. They drew together in common resistance
against the foe, as if some part of the sacrifice exacted of Boule de Suif had
been demanded of each. The count declared, with supreme disgust, that those
people behaved like ancient barbarians. The women, above all, manifested a
lively and tender sympathy for Boule de Suif. The nuns, who appeared only at
meals, cast down their eyes, and said nothing.

They dined, however, as soon as the first indignant outburst had subsided; but
they spoke little and thought much.

The ladies went to bed early; and the men, having lighted their pipes, proposed
a game of ecarte, in which Monsieur Follenvie was invited to join, the
travellers hoping to question him skillfully as to the best means of
vanquishing the officer's obduracy. But he thought of nothing but his cards,
would listen to nothing, reply to nothing, and repeated, time after time:
"Attend to the game, gentlemen! attend to the game!" So absorbed was his
attention that he even forgot to expectorate. The consequence was that his
chest gave forth rumbling sounds like those of an organ. 
