Suddenly, at the end of the street, the officer appeared. His tall, wasp-like,
uniformed figure was outlined against the snow which bounded the horizon, and
he walked, knees apart, with that motion peculiar to soldiers, who are always
anxious not to soil their carefully polished boots.

He bowed as he passed the ladies, then glanced scornfully at the men, who had
sufficient dignity not to raise their hats, though Loiseau made a movement to
do so.

Boule de Suif flushed crimson to the ears, and the three married women felt
unutterably humiliated at being met thus by the soldier in company with the
girl whom he had treated with such scant ceremony.

Then they began to talk about him, his figure, and his face. Madame
Carre-Lamadon, who had known many officers and judged them as a connoisseur,
thought him not at all bad-looking; she even regretted that he was not a
Frenchman, because in that case he would have made a very handsome hussar, with
whom all the women would assuredly have fallen in love.

When they were once more within doors they did not know what to do with
themselves. Sharp words even were exchanged apropos of the merest trifles. The
silent dinner was quickly over, and each one went to bed early in the hope of
sleeping, and thus killing time.

They came down next morning with tired faces and irritable tempers; the women
scarcely spoke to Boule de Suif.

A church bell summoned the faithful to a baptism. Boule de Suif had a child
being brought up by peasants at Yvetot. She did not see him once a year, and
never thought of him; but the idea of the child who was about to be baptized
induced a sudden wave of tenderness for her own, and she insisted on being
present at the ceremony.

As soon as she had gone out, the rest of the company looked at one another and
then drew their chairs together; for they realized that they must decide on
some course of action. Loiseau had an inspiration: he proposed that they should
ask the officer to detain Boule de Suif only, and to let the rest depart on
their way.

Monsieur Follenvie was intrusted with this commission, but he returned to them
almost immediately. The German, who knew human nature, had shown him the door.
He intended to keep all the travellers until his condition had been complied
with.

Whereupon Madame Loiseau's vulgar temperament broke bounds.

"We're not going to die of old age here!" she cried. "Since it's that vixen's
trade to behave so with men I don't see that she has any right to refuse one
more than another. I may as well tell you she took any lovers she could get at
Rouen—even coachmen! Yes, indeed, madame—the coachman at the prefecture! I know
it for a fact, for he buys his wine of us. And now that it is a question of
getting us out of a difficulty she puts on virtuous airs, the drab! For my
part, I think this officer has behaved very well. Why, there were three others
of us, any one of whom he would undoubtedly have preferred. But no, he contents
himself with the girl who is common property. He respects married women. Just
think. He is master here. He had only to say: 'I wish it!' and he might have
taken us by force, with the help of his soldiers."
