But at dinner the coalition weakened. Loiseau made three unfortunate remarks.
Each was cudgeling his brains for further examples of self-sacrifice, and could
find none, when the countess, possibly without ulterior motive, and moved
simply by a vague desire to do homage to religion, began to question the elder
of the two nuns on the most striking facts in the lives of the saints. Now, it
fell out that many of these had committed acts which would be crimes in our
eyes, but the Church readily pardons such deeds when they are accomplished for
the glory of God or the good of mankind. This was a powerful argument, and the
countess made the most of it. Then, whether by reason of a tacit understanding,
a thinly veiled act of complaisance such as those who wear the ecclesiastical
habit excel in, or whether merely as the result of sheer stupidity—a stupidity
admirably adapted to further their designs—the old nun rendered formidable aid
to the conspirator. They had thought her timid; she proved herself bold,
talkative, bigoted. She was not troubled by the ins and outs of casuistry; her
doctrines were as iron bars; her faith knew no doubt; her conscience no
scruples. She looked on Abraham's sacrifice as natural enough, for she herself
would not have hesitated to kill both father and mother if she had received a
divine order to that effect; and nothing, in her opinion, could displease our
Lord, provided the motive were praiseworthy. The countess, putting to good use
the consecrated authority of her unexpected ally, led her on to make a lengthy
and edifying paraphrase of that axiom enunciated by a certain school of
moralists: "The end justifies the means."

"Then, sister," she asked, "you think God accepts all methods, and pardons the
act when the motive is pure?"

"Undoubtedly, madame. An action reprehensible in itself often derives merit
from the thought which inspires it."

And in this wise they talked on, fathoming the wishes of God, predicting His
judgments, describing Him as interested in matters which assuredly concern Him
but little.

All was said with the utmost care and discretion, but every word uttered by the
holy woman in her nun's garb weakened the indignant resistance of the
courtesan. Then the conversation drifted somewhat, and the nun began to talk of
the convents of her order, of her Superior, of herself, and of her fragile
little neighbor, Sister St. Nicephore. They had been sent for from Havre to
nurse the hundreds of soldiers who were in hospitals, stricken with smallpox.
She described these wretched invalids and their malady. And, while they
themselves were detained on their way by the caprices of the Prussian officer,
scores of Frenchmen might be dying, whom they would otherwise have saved! For
the nursing of soldiers was the old nun's specialty; she had been in the
Crimea, in Italy, in Austria; and as she told the story of her campaigns she
revealed herself as one of those holy sisters of the fife and drum who seem
designed by nature to follow camps, to snatch the wounded from amid the strife
of battle, and to quell with a word, more effectually than any general, the
rough and insubordinate troopers—a masterful woman, her seamed and pitted face
itself an image of the devastations of war.

No one spoke when she had finished for fear of spoiling the excellent effect of
her words.

As soon as the meal was over the travellers retired to their rooms, whence they
emerged the following day at a late hour of the morning.
