The two good sisters brought to light a hunk of sausage smelling strongly of
garlic; and Cornudet, plunging both hands at once into the capacious pockets of
his loose overcoat, produced from one four hard-boiled eggs and from the other
a crust of bread. He removed the shells, threw them into the straw beneath his
feet, and began to devour the eggs, letting morsels of the bright yellow yolk
fall in his mighty beard, where they looked like stars.

Boule de Suif, in the haste and confusion of her departure, had not thought of
anything, and, stifling with rage, she watched all these people placidly
eating. At first, ill-suppressed wrath shook her whole person, and she opened
her lips to shriek the truth at them, to overwhelm them with a volley of
insults; but she could not utter a word, so choked was she with indignation.

No one looked at her, no one thought of her. She felt herself swallowed up in
the scorn of these virtuous creatures, who had first sacrificed, then rejected
her as a thing useless and unclean. Then she remembered her big basket full of
the good things they had so greedily devoured: the two chickens coated in
jelly, the pies, the pears, the four bottles of claret; and her fury broke
forth like a cord that is overstrained, and she was on the verge of tears. She
made terrible efforts at self-control, drew herself up, swallowed the sobs
which choked her; but the tears rose nevertheless, shone at the brink of her
eyelids, and soon two heavy drops coursed slowly down her cheeks. Others
followed more quickly, like water filtering from a rock, and fell, one after
another, on her rounded bosom. She sat upright, with a fixed expression, her
face pale and rigid, hoping desperately that no one saw her give way.

But the countess noticed that she was weeping, and with a sign drew her
husband's attention to the fact. He shrugged his shoulders, as if to say:
"Well, what of it? It's not my fault." Madame Loiseau chuckled triumphantly,
and murmured:

"She's weeping for shame."

The two nuns had betaken themselves once more to their prayers, first wrapping
the remainder of their sausage in paper:

Then Cornudet, who was digesting his eggs, stretched his long legs under the
opposite seat, threw himself back, folded his arms, smiled like a man who had
just thought of a good joke, and began to whistle the Marseillaise.
