The captain had a plan of his own, that he had been cogitating over for some
time. A man in that part of the country whom he knew was going to lend him a
cart and six suits of peasants' clothes. We could hide under some straw at the
bottom of the wagon, which would be loaded with Gruyere cheese, which he was
supposed to be going to sell in France. The captain told the sentinels that he
was taking two friends with him to protect his goods, in case any one should
try to rob him, which did not seem an extraordinary precaution. A Swiss officer
seemed to look at the wagon in a knowing manner, but that was in order to
impress his soldiers. In a word, neither officers nor men could make it out.

"Get up," the captain said to the horses, as he cracked his whip, while our
three men quietly smoked their pipes. I was half suffocated in my box, which
only admitted the air through those holes in front, and at the same time I was
nearly frozen, for it was terribly cold.

"Get up," the captain said again, and the wagon loaded with Gruyere cheese
entered France.

The Prussian lines were very badly guarded, as the enemy trusted to the
watchfulness of the Swiss. The sergeant spoke North German, while our captain
spoke the bad German of the Four Cantons, and so they could not understand each
other. The sergeant, however, pretended to be very intelligent; and, in order
to make us believe that he understood us, they allowed us to continue our
journey; and, after travelling for seven hours, being continually stopped in
the same manner, we arrived at a small village of the Jura in ruins, at
nightfall.

What were we going to do? Our only arms were the captain's whip, our uniforms
our peasants' blouses, and our food the Gruyere cheese. Our sole wealth
consisted in our ammunition, packages of cartridges which we had stowed away
inside some of the large cheeses. We had about a thousand of them, just two
hundred each, but we needed rifles, and they must be chassepots. Luckily,
however, the captain was a bold man of an inventive mind, and this was the plan
that he hit upon:

While three of us remained hidden in a cellar in the abandoned village, he
continued his journey as far as Besancon with the empty wagon and one man. The
town was invested, but one can always make one's way into a town among the
hills by crossing the tableland till within about ten miles of the walls, and
then following paths and ravines on foot. They left their wagon at Omans, among
the Germans, and escaped out of it at night on foot; so as to gain the heights
which border the River Doubs; the next day they entered Besancon, where there
were plenty of chassepots. There were nearly forty thousand of them left in the
arsenal, and General Roland, a brave marine, laughed at the captain's daring
project, but let him have six rifles and wished him "good luck." There he had
also found his wife, who had been through all the war with us before the
campaign in the East, and who had been only prevented by illness from
continuing with Bourbaki's army. She had recovered, however, in spite of the
cold, which was growing more and more intense, and in spite of the numberless
privations that awaited her, she persisted in accompanying her husband. He was
obliged to give way to her, and they all three, the captain, his wife, and our
comrade, started on their expedition.

Going was nothing in comparison to returning. They were obliged to travel by
night, so as to avoid meeting anybody, as the possession of six rifles would
have made them liable to suspicion. But, in spite of everything, a week after
leaving us, the captain and his two men were back with us again. The campaign
was about to begin.
