We set out. One of us took up his position a good way from the village on the
crossroads; I was posted at the entrance of the main street, where the road
from the level country enters the village, while the two others, the captain
and his wife, were in the middle of the village, near the church, whose
tower-served for an observatory and citadel.

We had not been in our places long before we heard a shot, followed by another,
and then two, then three. The first was evidently a chassepot —one recognized
it by the sharp report, which sounds like the crack of a whip—while the other
three came from the lancers' carbines.

The captain was furious. He had given orders to the outpost to let the enemy
pass and merely to follow them at a distance if they marched toward the
village, and to join me when they had gone well between the houses. Then they
were to appear suddenly, take the patrol between two fires, and not allow a
single man to escape; for, posted as we were, the six of us could have hemmed
in ten Prussians, if needful.

"That confounded Piedelot has roused them," the captain said, "and they will
not venture to come on blindfolded any longer. And then I am quite sure that he
has managed to get a shot into himself somewhere or other, for we hear nothing
of him. It serves him right; why did he not obey orders?" And then, after a
moment, he grumbled in his beard: "After all I am sorry for the poor fellow; he
is so brave, and shoots so well!"

The captain was right in his conjectures. We waited until evening, without
seeing the uhlans; they had retreated after the first attack; but unfortunately
we had not seen Piedelot, either. Was he dead or a prisoner? When night came,
the captain proposed that we should go out and look for him, and so the three
of us started. At the crossroads we found a broken rifle and some blood, while
the ground was trampled down; but we did not find either a wounded man or a
dead body, although we searched every thicket, and at midnight we returned
without having discovered anything of our unfortunate comrade.

"It is very strange," the captain growled. "They must have killed him and
thrown him into the bushes somewhere; they cannot possibly have taken him
prisoner, as he would have called out for help. I cannot understand it at all."
Just as he said that, bright flames shot up in the direction of the inn on the
high road, which illuminated the sky.

"Scoundrels! cowards!" he shouted. "I will bet that they have set fire to the
two houses on the marketplace, in order to have their revenge, and then they
will scuttle off without saying a word. They will be satisfied with having
killed a man and set fire to two houses. All right. It shall not pass over like
that. We must go for them; they will not like to leave their illuminations in
order to fight."

"It would be a great stroke of luck if we could set Piedelot free at the same
time," some one said.

The five of us set off, full of rage and hope. In twenty minutes we had got to
the bottom of the coulee, and had not yet seen any one when we were within a
hundred yards of the inn. The fire was behind the house, and all we saw of it
was the reflection above the roof. However, we were walking rather slowly, as
we were afraid of an ambush, when suddenly we heard Piedelot's well-known
voice. It had a strange sound, however; for it was at the same time—dull and
vibrating, stifled and clear, as if he were calling out as loud as he could
with a bit of rag stuffed into his mouth. He seemed to be hoarse and gasping,
and the unlucky fellow kept exclaiming: "Help! Help!"
