It was all past and over. I had been feverish, had had the nightmare. I know
not what. I had been ill, in fact, but yet thought I was a great fool.

I enjoyed myself thoroughly that evening. I dined at a restaurant and afterward
went to the theatre, and then started for home. But as I got near the house I
was once more seized by a strange feeling of uneasiness. I was afraid of seeing
him again. I was not afraid of him, not afraid of his presence, in which I did
not believe; but I was afraid of being deceived again. I was afraid of some
fresh hallucination, afraid lest fear should take possession of me.

For more than an hour I wandered up and down the pavement; then, feeling that I
was really too foolish, I returned home. I breathed so hard that I could hardly
get upstairs, and remained standing outside my door for more than ten minutes;
then suddenly I had a courageous impulse and my will asserted itself. I
inserted my key into the lock, and went into the apartment with a candle in my
hand. I kicked open my bedroom door, which was partly open, and cast a
frightened glance toward the fireplace. There was nothing there. A-h! What a
relief and what a delight! What a deliverance! I walked up and down briskly and
boldly, but I was not altogether reassured, and kept turning round with a jump;
the very shadows in the corners disquieted me.

I slept badly, and was constantly disturbed by imaginary noises, but did not
see him; no, that was all over.

Since that time I have been afraid of being alone at night. I feel that the
spectre is there, close to me, around me; but it has not appeared to me again.

And supposing it did, what would it matter, since I do not believe in it, and
know that it is nothing?

However, it still worries me, because I am constantly thinking of it. His right
arm hanging down and his head inclined to the left like a man who was asleep—I
don't want to think about it!

Why, however, am I so persistently possessed with this idea? His feet were
close to the fire!

He haunts me; it is very stupid, but who and what is he? I know that he does
not exist except in my cowardly imagination, in my fears, and in my agony.
There—enough of that!

Yes, it is all very well for me to reason with myself, to stiffen my backbone,
so to say; but I cannot remain at home because I know he is there. I know I
shall not see him again; he will not show himself again; that is all over. But
he is there, all the same, in my thoughts. He remains invisible, but that does
not prevent his being there. He is behind the doors, in the closed cupboard, in
the wardrobe, under the bed, in every dark corner. If I open the door or the
cupboard, if I take the candle to look under the bed and throw a light on the
dark places he is there no longer, but I feel that he is behind me. I turn
round, certain that I shall not see him, that I shall never see him again; but
for all that, he is behind me.

It is very stupid, it is dreadful; but what am I to do? I cannot help it.

But if there were two of us in the place I feel certain that he would not be
there any longer, for he is there just because I am alone, simply and solely
because I am alone!
