I had first seen it from Cancale, this fairy castle in the sea. I got an
indistinct impression of it as of a gray shadow outlined against the misty sky.
I saw it again from Avranches at sunset. The immense stretch of sand was red,
the horizon was red, the whole boundless bay was red. The rocky castle rising
out there in the distance like a weird, seignorial residence, like a dream
palace, strange and beautiful-this alone remained black in the crimson light of
the dying day.

The following morning at dawn I went toward it across the sands, my eyes
fastened on this, gigantic jewel, as big as a mountain, cut like a cameo, and
as dainty as lace. The nearer I approached the greater my admiration grew, for
nothing in the world could be more wonderful or more perfect.

As surprised as if I had discovered the habitation of a god, I wandered through
those halls supported by frail or massive columns, raising my eyes in wonder to
those spires which looked like rockets starting for the sky, and to that
marvellous assemblage of towers, of gargoyles, of slender and charming
ornaments, a regular fireworks of stone, granite lace, a masterpiece of
colossal and delicate architecture.

As I was looking up in ecstasy a Lower Normandy peasant came up to me and told
me the story of the great quarrel between Saint Michael and the devil.

A sceptical genius has said: "God made man in his image and man has returned
the compliment."

This saying is an eternal truth, and it would be very curious to write the
history of the local divinity of every continent as well as the history of the
patron saints in each one of our provinces. The negro has his ferocious
man-eating idols; the polygamous Mahometan fills his paradise with women; the
Greeks, like a practical people, deified all the passions.

Every village in France is under the influence of some protecting saint,
modelled according to the characteristics of the inhabitants.

Saint Michael watches over Lower Normandy, Saint Michael, the radiant and
victorious angel, the sword-carrier, the hero of Heaven, the victorious, the
conqueror of Satan.

But this is how the Lower Normandy peasant, cunning, deceitful and tricky,
understands and tells of the struggle between the great saint and the devil.

To escape from the malice of his neighbor, the devil, Saint Michael built
himself, in the open ocean, this habitation worthy of an archangel; and only
such a saint could build a residence of such magnificence.

But as he still feared the approaches of the wicked one, he surrounded his
domains by quicksands, more treacherous even than the sea.

The devil lived in a humble cottage on the hill, but he owned all the salt
marshes, the rich lands where grow the finest crops, the wooded valleys and all
the fertile hills of the country, while the saint a ruled only over the sands.
Therefore Satan was rich, whereas Saint Michael was as poor as a church mouse.

After a few years of fasting the saint grew tired of this state of affairs and
began to think of some compromise with the devil, but the matter was by no
means easy, as Satan kept a good hold on his crops.
