They slept the peaceful sleep of a quiet conscience, until they got to Rouen,
and when they returned to the house, refreshed and rested, Madame Tellier could
not help saying:

"It was all very well, but I was longing to get home."

They hurried over their supper, and then, when they had put on their usual
evening costume, waited for their regular customers, and the little colored
lamp outside the door told the passers-by that Madame Tellier had returned, and
in a moment the news spread, nobody knew how or through whom.

Monsieur Philippe, the banker's son, even carried his friendliness so far as to
send a special messenger to Monsieur Tournevau, who was in the bosom of his
family.

The fish curer had several cousins to dinner every Sunday, and they were having
coffee, when a man came in with a letter in his hand. Monsieur Tournevau was
much excited; he opened the envelope and grew pale; it contained only these
words in pencil:

"The cargo of cod has been found; the ship has come into port; good business
for you. Come immediately."

He felt in his pockets, gave the messenger two sons, and suddenly blushing to
his ears, he said: "I must go out." He handed his wife the laconic and
mysterious note, rang the bell, and when the servant came in, he asked her to
bring him has hat and overcoat immediately. As soon as he was in the street, he
began to hurry, and the way seemed to him to be twice as long as usual, in
consequence of his impatience.

Madame Tellier's establishment had put on quite a holiday look. On the ground
floor, a number of sailors were making a deafening noise, and Louise and Flora
drank with one and the other, and were being called for in every direction at
once.

The upstairs room was full by nine o'clock. Monsieur Vasse, the Judge of the
Tribunal of Commerce, Madame Tellier's regular but Platonic wooer, was talking
to her in a corner in a low voice, and they were both smiling, as if they were
about to come to an understanding.

Monsieur Poulin, the ex-mayor, was talking to Rosa, and she was running her
hands through the old gentleman's white whiskers.

Tall Fernande was on the sofa, her feet on the coat of Monsieur Pinipesse, the
tax collector, and leaning back against young Monsieur Philippe, her right arm
around his neck, while she held a cigarette in her left hand.

Raphaele appeared to be talking seriously with Monsieur Dupuis, the insurance
agent, and she finished by saying: "Yes, I will, yes."

Just then, the door opened suddenly, and Monsieur Tournevau came in, and was
greeted with enthusiastic cries of "Long live Tournevau!" And Raphaele, who was
dancing alone up and down the room, went and threw herself into his arms. He
seized her in a vigorous embrace and, without saying a word, lifted her up as
if she had been a feather.

Rosa was chatting to the ex-mayor, kissing him and puffing; both his whiskers
at the same time, in order to keep his head straight.
