"During the month of May I was invited to the wedding of my cousin, Simon
d'Erabel, in Normandy. It was a regular Normandy wedding. We sat down at the
table at five o'clock in the evening and at eleven o'clock we were still
eating. I had been paired off, for the occasion, with a Mademoiselle Dumoulin,
daughter of a retired colonel, a young, blond, soldierly person, well formed,
frank and talkative. She took complete possession of me for the whole day,
dragged me into the park, made me dance willy-nilly, bored me to death. I said
to myself: 'That's all very well for to-day, but tomorrow I'll get out. That's
all there is to it!'

"Toward eleven o'clock at night the women retired to their rooms; the men
stayed, smoking while they drank or drinking while they smoked, whichever you
will.

"Through the open window we could see the country folks dancing. Farmers and
peasant girls were jumping about in a circle yelling at the top of their lungs
a dance air which was feebly accompanied by two violins and a clarinet. The
wild song of the peasants often completely drowned the sound of the
instruments, and the weak music, interrupted by the unrestrained voices, seemed
to come to us in little fragments of scattered notes. Two enormous casks,
surrounded by flaming torches, contained drinks for the crowd. Two men were
kept busy rinsing the glasses or bowls in a bucket and immediately holding them
under the spigots, from which flowed the red stream of wine or the golden
stream of pure cider; and the parched dancers, the old ones quietly, the girls
panting, came up, stretched out their arms and grasped some receptacle, threw
back their heads and poured down their throats the drink which they preferred.
On a table were bread, butter, cheese and sausages. Each one would step up from
time to time and swallow a mouthful, and under the starlit sky this healthy and
violent exercise was a pleasing sight, and made one also feel like drinking
from these enormous casks and eating the crisp bread and butter with a raw
onion.

"A mad desire seized me to take part in this merrymaking, and I left my
companions. I must admit that I was probably a little tipsy, but I was soon
entirely so.

"I grabbed the hand of a big, panting peasant woman and I jumped her about
until I was out of breath.

"Then I drank some wine and reached for another girl. In order to refresh
myself afterward, I swallowed a bowlful of cider, and I began to bounce around
as if possessed.

"I was very light on my feet. The boys, delighted, were watching me and trying
to imitate me; the girls all wished to dance with me, and jumped about heavily
with the grace of cows.

"After each dance I drank a glass of wine or a glass of cider, and toward two
o'clock in the morning I was so drunk that I could hardly stand up.

"I realized my condition and tried to reach my room. Everybody was asleep and
the house was silent and dark.

"I had no matches and everybody was in bed. As soon as I reached the vestibule
I began to, feel dizzy. I had a lot of trouble to find the banister. At last,
by accident, my hand came in contact with it, and I sat down on the first step
of the stairs in order to try to gather my scattered wits.
