The subject of sequestration of the person came up in speaking of a recent
lawsuit, and each of us had a story to tell—a true story, he said. We had been
spending the evening together at an old family mansion in the Rue de Grenelle,
just a party of intimate friends. The old Marquis de la Tour-Samuel, who was
eighty-two, rose, and, leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece, said in his
somewhat shaky voice:

"I also know of something strange, so strange that it has haunted me all my
life. It is now fifty-six years since the incident occurred, and yet not a
month passes that I do not see it again in a dream, so great is the impression
of fear it has left on my mind. For ten minutes I experienced such horrible
fright that ever since then a sort of constant terror has remained with me.
Sudden noises startle me violently, and objects imperfectly distinguished at
night inspire me with a mad desire to flee from them. In short, I am afraid of
the dark!

"But I would not have acknowledged that before I reached my present age. Now I
can say anything. I have never receded before real danger, ladies. It is,
therefore, permissible, at eighty-two years of age, not to be brave in presence
of imaginary danger.

"That affair so completely upset me, caused me such deep and mysterious and
terrible distress, that I never spoke of it to any one. I will now tell it to
you exactly as it happened, without any attempt at explanation.

"In July, 1827, I was stationed at Rouen. One day as I was walking along the
quay I met a man whom I thought I recognized without being able to recall
exactly who he was. Instinctively I made a movement to stop. The stranger
perceived it and at once extended his hand.

"He was a friend to whom I had been deeply attached as a youth. For five years
I had not seen him; he seemed to have aged half a century. His hair was quite
white and he walked bent over as though completely exhausted. He apparently
understood my surprise, and he told me of the misfortune which had shattered
his life.

"Having fallen madly in love with a young girl, he had married her, but after a
year of more than earthly happiness she died suddenly of an affection of the
heart. He left his country home on the very day of her burial and came to his
town house in Rouen, where he lived, alone and unhappy, so sad and wretched
that he thought constantly of suicide.

"'Since I have found you again in this manner,' he said, 'I will ask you to
render me an important service. It is to go and get me out of the desk in my
bedroom—our bedroom—some papers of which I have urgent need. I cannot send a
servant or a business clerk, as discretion and absolute silence are necessary.
As for myself, nothing on earth would induce me to reenter that house. I will
give you the key of the room, which I myself locked on leaving, and the key of
my desk, also a few words for my gardener, telling him to open the chateau for
you. But come and breakfast with me tomorrow and we will arrange all that.'

"I promised to do him the slight favor he asked. It was, for that matter, only
a ride which I could make in an hour on horseback, his property being but a few
miles distant from Rouen.

"At ten o'clock the following day I breakfasted, tete-a-tete, with my friend,
but he scarcely spoke.
