This one is so very old that I cannot understand how it has clung so vividly
and tenaciously to my memory. Since then I have seen so many sinister things,
which were either affecting or terrible, that I am astonished at not being able
to pass a single day without the face of Mother Bellflower recurring to my
mind's eye, just as I knew her formerly, now so long ago, when I was ten or
twelve years old.

She was an old seamstress who came to my parents' house once a week, every
Thursday, to mend the linen. My parents lived in one of those country houses
called chateaux, which are merely old houses with gable roofs, to which are
attached three or four farms lying around them.

The village, a large village, almost a market town, was a few hundred yards
away, closely circling the church, a red brick church, black with age.

Well, every Thursday Mother Clochette came between half-past six and seven in
the morning, and went immediately into the linen-room and began to work. She
was a tall, thin, bearded or rather hairy woman, for she had a beard all over
her face, a surprising, an unexpected beard, growing in improbable tufts, in
curly bunches which looked as if they had been sown by a madman over that great
face of a gendarme in petticoats. She had them on her nose, under her nose,
round her nose, on her chin, on her cheeks; and her eyebrows, which were
extraordinarily thick and long, and quite gray, bushy and bristling, looked
exactly like a pair of mustaches stuck on there by mistake.

She limped, not as lame people generally do, but like a ship at anchor. When
she planted her great, bony, swerving body on her sound leg, she seemed to be
preparing to mount some enormous wave, and then suddenly she dipped as if to
disappear in an abyss, and buried herself in the ground. Her walk reminded one
of a storm, as she swayed about, and her head, which was always covered with an
enormous white cap, whose ribbons fluttered down her back, seemed to traverse
the horizon from north to south and from south to north, at each step.

I adored Mother Clochette. As soon as I was up I went into the linen-room where
I found her installed at work, with a foot-warmer under her feet. As soon as I
arrived, she made me take the foot-warmer and sit upon it, so that I might not
catch cold in that large, chilly room under the roof.

"That draws the blood from your throat," she said to me.

She told me stories, whilst mending the linen with her long crooked nimble
fingers; her eyes behind her magnifying spectacles, for age had impaired her
sight, appeared enormous to me, strangely profound, double.

She had, as far as I can remember the things which she told me and by which my
childish heart was moved, the large heart of a poor woman. She told me what had
happened in the village, how a cow had escaped from the cow-house and had been
found the next morning in front of Prosper Malet's windmill, looking at the
sails turning, or about a hen's egg which had been found in the church belfry
without any one being able to understand what creature had been there to lay
it, or the story of Jean-Jean Pila's dog, who had been ten leagues to bring
back his master's breeches which a tramp had stolen whilst they were hanging up
to dry out of doors, after he had been in the rain. She told me these simple
adventures in such a manner, that in my mind they assumed the proportions of
never-to-be -forgotten dramas, of grand and mysterious poems; and the ingenious
stories invented by the poets which my mother told me in the evening, had none
of the flavor, none of the breadth or vigor of the peasant woman's narratives.
