The white therefore signifieth joy, solace, and gladness, and that not at
random, but upon just and very good grounds: which you may perceive to be true,
if laying aside all prejudicate affections, you will but give ear to what
presently I shall expound unto you.  Aristotle saith that, supposing two things
contrary in their kind, as good and evil, virtue and vice, heat and cold, white
and black, pleasure and pain, joy and grief,—and so of others,—if you couple
them in such manner that the contrary of one kind may agree in reason with the
contrary of the other, it must follow by consequence that the other contrary
must answer to the remanent opposite to that wherewith it is conferred. As, for
example, virtue and vice are contrary in one kind, so are good and evil. If one
of the contraries of the first kind be consonant to one of those of the second,
as virtue and goodness, for it is clear that virtue is good, so shall the other
two contraries, which are evil and vice, have the same connection, for vice is
evil.  This logical rule being understood, take these two contraries, joy and
sadness; then these other two, white and black, for they are physically
contrary. If so be, then, that black do signify grief, by good reason then
should white import joy. Nor is this signification instituted by human
imposition, but by the universal consent of the world received, which
philosophers call Jus Gentium, the Law of Nations, or an uncontrollable right
of force in all countries whatsoever. For you know well enough that all people,
and all languages and nations, except the ancient Syracusans and certain
Argives, who had cross and thwarting souls, when they mean outwardly to give
evidence of their sorrow, go in black; and all mourning is done with black.
Which general consent is not without some argument and reason in nature, the
which every man may by himself very suddenly comprehend, without the
instruction of any—and this we call the law of nature. By virtue of the same
natural instinct we know that by white all the world hath understood joy,
gladness, mirth, pleasure, and delight. In former times the Thracians and
Cretans did mark their good, propitious, and fortunate days with white stones,
and their sad, dismal, and unfortunate ones with black. Is not the night
mournful, sad, and melancholic? It is black and dark by the privation of light.
Doth not the light comfort all the world? And it is more white than anything
else. Which to prove, I could direct you to the book of Laurentius Valla
against Bartolus; but an evangelical testimony I hope will content you. Matth.
17 it is said that, at the transfiguration of our Lord, Vestimenta ejus facta
sunt alba sicut lux, his apparel was made white like the light. By which
lightsome whiteness he gave his three apostles to understand the idea and
figure of the eternal joys; for by the light are all men comforted, according
to the word of the old woman, who, although she had never a tooth in her head,
was wont to say, Bona lux. And Tobit, chap.5, after he had lost his sight, when
Raphael saluted him, answered, What joy can I have, that do not see the light
of Heaven? In that colour did the angels testify the joy of the whole world at
the resurrection of our Saviour, John 20, and at his ascension, Acts 1. With
the like colour of vesture did St. John the Evangelist, Apoc. 4.7, see the
faithful clothed in the heavenly and blessed Jerusalem.  Read the ancient, both
Greek and Latin histories, and you shall find that the town of Alba (the first
pattern of Rome) was founded and so named by reason of a white sow that was
seen there. You shall likewise find in those stories, that when any man, after
he had vanquished his enemies, was by decree of the senate to enter into Rome
triumphantly, he usually rode in a chariot drawn by white horses: which in the
ovation triumph was also the custom; for by no sign or colour would they so
significantly express the joy of their coming as by the white. You shall there
also find, how Pericles, the general of the Athenians, would needs have that
part of his army unto whose lot befell the white beans, to spend the whole day
in mirth, pleasure, and ease, whilst the rest were a-fighting. A thousand other
examples and places could I allege to this purpose, but that it is not here
where I should do it.
