Gargantua, from three years upwards unto five, was brought up and instructed in
all convenient discipline by the commandment of his father; and spent that time
like the other little children of the country, that is, in drinking, eating,
and sleeping: in eating, sleeping, and drinking: and in sleeping, drinking, and
eating. Still he wallowed and rolled up and down himself in the mire and
dirt—he blurred and sullied his nose with filth—he blotted and smutched his
face with any kind of scurvy stuff—he trod down his shoes in the heel—at the
flies he did oftentimes yawn, and ran very heartily after the butterflies, the
empire whereof belonged to his father. He pissed in his shoes, shit in his
shirt, and wiped his nose on his sleeve—he did let his snot and snivel fall in
his pottage, and dabbled, paddled, and slobbered everywhere—he would drink in
his slipper, and ordinarily rub his belly against a pannier. He sharpened his
teeth with a top, washed his hands with his broth, and combed his head with a
bowl. He would sit down betwixt two stools, and his arse to the ground —would
cover himself with a wet sack, and drink in eating of his soup. He did eat his
cake sometimes without bread, would bite in laughing, and laugh in biting.
Oftentimes did he spit in the basin, and fart for fatness, piss against the
sun, and hide himself in the water for fear of rain. He would strike out of the
cold iron, be often in the dumps, and frig and wriggle it. He would flay the
fox, say the ape's paternoster, return to his sheep, and turn the hogs to the
hay. He would beat the dogs before the lion, put the plough before the oxen,
and claw where it did not itch. He would pump one to draw somewhat out of him,
by griping all would hold fast nothing, and always eat his white bread first.
He shoed the geese, kept a self-tickling to make himself laugh, and was very
steadable in the kitchen: made a mock at the gods, would cause sing Magnificat
at matins, and found it very convenient so to do. He would eat cabbage, and
shite beets,—knew flies in a dish of milk, and would make them lose their feet.
He would scrape paper, blur parchment, then run away as hard as he could. He
would pull at the kid's leather, or vomit up his dinner, then reckon without
his host. He would beat the bushes without catching the birds, thought the moon
was made of green cheese, and that bladders are lanterns. Out of one sack he
would take two moultures or fees for grinding; would act the ass's part to get
some bran, and of his fist would make a mallet. He took the cranes at the first
leap, and would have the mail-coats to be made link after link. He always
looked a given horse in the mouth, leaped from the cock to the ass, and put one
ripe between two green. By robbing Peter he paid Paul, he kept the moon from
the wolves, and hoped to catch larks if ever the heavens should fall. He did
make of necessity virtue, of such bread such pottage, and cared as little for
the peeled as for the shaven. Every morning he did cast up his gorge, and his
father's little dogs eat out of the dish with him, and he with them. He would
bite their ears, and they would scratch his nose—he would blow in their arses,
and they would lick his chaps.
