When Ponocrates knew Gargantua's vicious manner of living, he resolved to bring
him up in another kind; but for a while he bore with him, considering that
nature cannot endure a sudden change, without great violence. Therefore, to
begin his work the better, he requested a learned physician of that time,
called Master Theodorus, seriously to perpend, if it were possible, how to
bring Gargantua into a better course. The said physician purged him canonically
with Anticyrian hellebore, by which medicine he cleansed all the alteration and
perverse habitude of his brain. By this means also Ponocrates made him forget
all that he had learned under his ancient preceptors, as Timotheus did to his
disciples, who had been instructed under other musicians. To do this the
better, they brought him into the company of learned men, which were there, in
whose imitation he had a great desire and affection to study otherwise, and to
improve his parts. Afterwards he put himself into such a road and way of
studying, that he lost not any one hour in the day, but employed all his time
in learning and honest knowledge. Gargantua awaked, then, about four o'clock in
the morning. Whilst they were in rubbing of him, there was read unto him some
chapter of the holy Scripture aloud and clearly, with a pronunciation fit for
the matter, and hereunto was appointed a young page born in Basche, named
Anagnostes. According to the purpose and argument of that lesson, he oftentimes
gave himself to worship, adore, pray, and send up his supplications to that
good God, whose Word did show his majesty and marvellous judgment. Then went he
unto the secret places to make excretion of his natural digestions. There his
master repeated what had been read, expounding unto him the most obscure and
difficult points. In returning, they considered the face of the sky, if it was
such as they had observed it the night before, and into what signs the sun was
entering, as also the moon for that day. This done, he was apparelled, combed,
curled, trimmed, and perfumed, during which time they repeated to him the
lessons of the day before. He himself said them by heart, and upon them would
ground some practical cases concerning the estate of man, which he would
prosecute sometimes two or three hours, but ordinarily they ceased as soon as
he was fully clothed. Then for three good hours he had a lecture read unto him.
This done they went forth, still conferring of the substance of the lecture,
either unto a field near the university called the Brack, or unto the meadows,
where they played at the ball, the long-tennis, and at the piletrigone (which
is a play wherein we throw a triangular piece of iron at a ring, to pass it),
most gallantly exercising their bodies, as formerly they had done their minds.
All their play was but in liberty, for they left off when they pleased, and
that was commonly when they did sweat over all their body, or were otherwise
weary. Then were they very well wiped and rubbed, shifted their shirts, and,
walking soberly, went to see if dinner was ready. Whilst they stayed for that,
they did clearly and eloquently pronounce some sentences that they had retained
of the lecture. In the meantime Master Appetite came, and then very orderly sat
they down at table. At the beginning of the meal there was read some pleasant
history of the warlike actions of former times, until he had taken a glass of
wine. Then, if they thought good, they continued reading, or began to discourse
merrily together; speaking first of the virtue, propriety, efficacy, and nature
of all that was served in at the table; of bread, of wine, of water, of salt,
of fleshes, fishes, fruits, herbs, roots, and of their dressing. By means
whereof he learned in a little time all the passages competent for this that
were to be found in Pliny, Athenaeus, Dioscorides, Julius Pollux, Galen,
Porphyry, Oppian, Polybius, Heliodore, Aristotle, Aelian, and others. Whilst
they talked of these things, many times, to be the more certain, they caused
the very books to be brought to the table, and so well and perfectly did he in
his memory retain the things above said, that in that time there was not a
physician that knew half so much as he did. Afterwards they conferred of the
lessons read in the morning, and, ending their repast with some conserve or
marmalade of quinces, he picked his teeth with mastic tooth-pickers, washed his
hands and eyes with fair fresh water, and gave thanks unto God in some fine
cantiques, made in praise of the divine bounty and munificence. This done, they
brought in cards, not to play, but to learn a thousand pretty tricks and new
inventions, which were all grounded upon arithmetic. By this means he fell in
love with that numerical science, and every day after dinner and supper he
passed his time in it as pleasantly as he was wont to do at cards and dice; so
that at last he understood so well both the theory and practical part thereof,
that Tunstall the Englishman, who had written very largely of that purpose,
confessed that verily in comparison of him he had no skill at all. And not only
in that, but in the other mathematical sciences, as geometry, astronomy, music,
&c. For in waiting on the concoction and attending the digestion of his food,
they made a thousand pretty instruments and geometrical figures, and did in
some measure practise the astronomical canons.
