After this they recreated themselves with singing musically, in four or five
parts, or upon a set theme or ground at random, as it best pleased them. In
matter of musical instruments, he learned to play upon the lute, the virginals,
the harp, the Almain flute with nine holes, the viol, and the sackbut. This
hour thus spent, and digestion finished, he did purge his body of natural
excrements, then betook himself to his principal study for three hours
together, or more, as well to repeat his matutinal lectures as to proceed in
the book wherein he was, as also to write handsomely, to draw and form the
antique and Roman letters. This being done, they went out of their house, and
with them a young gentleman of Touraine, named the Esquire Gymnast, who taught
him the art of riding. Changing then his clothes, he rode a Naples courser, a
Dutch roussin, a Spanish jennet, a barded or trapped steed, then a light fleet
horse, unto whom he gave a hundred carieres, made him go the high saults,
bounding in the air, free the ditch with a skip, leap over a stile or pale,
turn short in a ring both to the right and left hand. There he broke not his
lance; for it is the greatest foolery in the world to say, I have broken ten
lances at tilts or in fight. A carpenter can do even as much. But it is a
glorious and praise-worthy action with one lance to break and overthrow ten
enemies. Therefore, with a sharp, stiff, strong, and well-steeled lance would
he usually force up a door, pierce a harness, beat down a tree, carry away the
ring, lift up a cuirassier saddle, with the mail-coat and gauntlet. All this he
did in complete arms from head to foot. As for the prancing flourishes and
smacking popisms for the better cherishing of the horse, commonly used in
riding, none did them better than he. The cavallerize of Ferrara was but as an
ape compared to him. He was singularly skilful in leaping nimbly from one horse
to another without putting foot to ground, and these horses were called
desultories. He could likewise from either side, with a lance in his hand, leap
on horseback without stirrups, and rule the horse at his pleasure without a
bridle, for such things are useful in military engagements. Another day he
exercised the battle-axe, which he so dexterously wielded, both in the nimble,
strong, and smooth management of that weapon, and that in all the feats
practicable by it, that he passed knight of arms in the field, and at all
essays.  Then tossed he the pike, played with the two-handed sword, with the
backsword, with the Spanish tuck, the dagger, poniard, armed, unarmed, with a
buckler, with a cloak, with a target. Then would he hunt the hart, the roebuck,
the bear, the fallow deer, the wild boar, the hare, the pheasant, the
partridge, and the bustard. He played at the balloon, and made it bound in the
air, both with fist and foot. He wrestled, ran, jumped—not at three steps and a
leap, called the hops, nor at clochepied, called the hare's leap, nor yet at
the Almains; for, said Gymnast, these jumps are for the wars altogether
unprofitable, and of no use—but at one leap he would skip over a ditch, spring
over a hedge, mount six paces upon a wall, ramp and grapple after this fashion
up against a window of the full height of a lance. He did swim in deep waters
on his belly, on his back, sideways, with all his body, with his feet only,
with one hand in the air, wherein he held a book, crossing thus the breadth of
the river of Seine without wetting it, and dragged along his cloak with his
teeth, as did Julius Caesar; then with the help of one hand he entered forcibly
into a boat, from whence he cast himself again headlong into the water, sounded
the depths, hollowed the rocks, and plunged into the pits and gulfs. Then
turned he the boat about, governed it, led it swiftly or slowly with the stream
and against the stream, stopped it in his course, guided it with one hand, and
with the other laid hard about him with a huge great oar, hoisted the sail,
hied up along the mast by the shrouds, ran upon the edge of the decks, set the
compass in order, tackled the bowlines, and steered the helm. Coming out of the
water, he ran furiously up against a hill, and with the same alacrity and
swiftness ran down again. He climbed up at trees like a cat, and leaped from
the one to the other like a squirrel. He did pull down the great boughs and
branches like another Milo; then with two sharp well-steeled daggers and two
tried bodkins would he run up by the wall to the very top of a house like a
rat; then suddenly came down from the top to the bottom, with such an even
composition of members that by the fall he would catch no harm.
