He did cast the dart, throw the bar, put the stone, practise the javelin, the
boar-spear or partisan, and the halbert. He broke the strongest bows in
drawing, bended against his breast the greatest crossbows of steel, took his
aim by the eye with the hand-gun, and shot well, traversed and planted the
cannon, shot at butt-marks, at the papgay from below upwards, or to a height
from above downwards, or to a descent; then before him, sideways, and behind
him, like the Parthians. They tied a cable-rope to the top of a high tower, by
one end whereof hanging near the ground he wrought himself with his hands to
the very top; then upon the same track came down so sturdily and firm that you
could not on a plain meadow have run with more assurance. They set up a great
pole fixed upon two trees. There would he hang by his hands, and with them
alone, his feet touching at nothing, would go back and fore along the foresaid
rope with so great swiftness that hardly could one overtake him with running;
and then, to exercise his breast and lungs, he would shout like all the devils
in hell. I heard him once call Eudemon from St. Victor's gate to Montmartre.
Stentor had never such a voice at the siege of Troy. Then for the strengthening
of his nerves or sinews they made him two great sows of lead, each of them
weighing eight thousand and seven hundred quintals, which they called alteres.
Those he took up from the ground, in each hand one, then lifted them up over
his head, and held them so without stirring three quarters of an hour and more,
which was an inimitable force. He fought at barriers with the stoutest and most
vigorous champions; and when it came to the cope, he stood so sturdily on his
feet that he abandoned himself unto the strongest, in case they could remove
him from his place, as Milo was wont to do of old. In whose imitation,
likewise, he held a pomegranate in his hand, to give it unto him that could
take it from him. The time being thus bestowed, and himself rubbed, cleansed,
wiped, and refreshed with other clothes, he returned fair and softly; and
passing through certain meadows, or other grassy places, beheld the trees and
plants, comparing them with what is written of them in the books of the
ancients, such as Theophrast, Dioscorides, Marinus, Pliny, Nicander, Macer, and
Galen, and carried home to the house great handfuls of them, whereof a young
page called Rizotomos had charge; together with little mattocks, pickaxes,
grubbing-hooks, cabbies, pruning-knives, and other instruments requisite for
herborizing. Being come to their lodging, whilst supper was making ready, they
repeated certain passages of that which hath been read, and sat down to table.
Here remark, that his dinner was sober and thrifty, for he did then eat only to
prevent the gnawings of his stomach, but his supper was copious and large, for
he took then as much as was fit to maintain and nourish him; which, indeed, is
the true diet prescribed by the art of good and sound physic, although a rabble
of loggerheaded physicians, nuzzeled in the brabbling shop of sophisters,
counsel the contrary. During that repast was continued the lesson read at
dinner as long as they thought good; the rest was spent in good discourse,
learned and profitable. After that they had given thanks, he set himself to
sing vocally, and play upon harmonious instruments, or otherwise passed his
time at some pretty sports, made with cards or dice, or in practising the feats
of legerdemain with cups and balls. There they stayed some nights in frolicking
thus, and making themselves merry till it was time to go to bed; and on other
nights they would go make visits unto learned men, or to such as had been
travellers in strange and remote countries. When it was full night before they
retired themselves, they went unto the most open place of the house to see the
face of the sky, and there beheld the comets, if any were, as likewise the
figures, situations, aspects, oppositions, and conjunctions of both the fixed
stars and planets.
