It was related of him that he had wasted his youth and a considerable fortune
in Paris, and had returned home from there sick and tired of mankind. His mode
of life pointed to a love of the singular. In former years a learned father
from the neighboring Benedictine abbey had often been his guest ; it seemed as
if the quiet student of human nature took a secret pleasure in the unbridled
spirit and the pagan fervor of Nature-worship of the hermit, Bastide ; but when
he forcibly abducted a seamstress, pretty Charlotte Arlabosse, from Alby, and
lived with her in unlawful union, the Benedictine, in obedience to the command
of his supe- riors, was obliged to break off the intercourse. Thence- forth,
Bastide renounced all intimate human contact. He had no friend; he wished for
none. He secluded himself with disdainful pride ; the sight of a new face
turned his distant and cold ; people in society he treated with insult- ing
indifference. Perhaps it was only from a fear of dis- appointment that he
harshly withstood even the most friendly advances, for there lay at times a
vague yearning for love in the depths of his eyes. To grow hard because
unfulfilled claims afflict and darken the soul, to retire into solitude because
overweening pride shuns to lay bare the glowing heart, to be unjust from a
feeling of shame and misunderstood defiance — that was perhaps his lot, and
certainly his shortcoming. 

For days at a time he would roam about with his dogs in the valleys of the
Cevennes. He gathered stones, mush- rooms, flowers, caught birds and snakes,
hunted, sang, and fished. If something went wrong and his blood was up, he
mounted the fieriest horse in his stable and rode over the most dangerous paths
across the rocks, to Rieux. In win- ter, in the early cold hours, he was seen
bathing in the river; in sultry summer nights he lay naked and feverish under
the open sky.  When the court, in compliance with the opinion and accu- sation
of the people, which could not be ignored, ordered Bastide's arrest, he already
knew the forces at work against him. He was sitting under a huge plane-tree,
occupied with some wood-carving, when the constables appeared in the yard.
Charlotte Arlabosse rushed up to him and seized his arm, but he shook her off,
saying : ' ' Let them have their way, the abscess has been ripe a long time.' :
Stepping forward to meet the gendarmes with satirical pomposity, he cried:
"Your servant, gentlemen." 

The occupants of La Morne were subjected to a rigorous examination. According
to Bastide's own statement, he had ridden to Rodez on the afternoon of the
nineteenth of March; at seven in the evening he was already with his sister in
the village of Gros ; there he remained over night, returned in the morning to
La Morne, then upon the news of his uncle's death, he had ridden to Rodez once
more and spent about half an hour in Fualdes' house.  These occurrences were by
no means concealed from Bousquier and his associates; nay, insignificant
details were emphatically dwelt upon, in order to give them a sense of security
and assist their memory. It was the smuggler Bach, in particular — who, with
the Bancal couple, could not at first be induced to make a statement — that the
police magistrate had in view. He had terrified judges and keepers by his
violent paroxysms of rage, and, to punish and subdue him, had been put in
chains. Uncon- scious of it himself, this man suffered from a fierce longing
for freedom, for he was the model of a roving vagabond and tramp. One night
when he had attempted to strangle himself, Monsieur Jausion acquainted him with
the con- fession of his comrade, Bousquier, and admonished him too to abandon
his fruitless stubbornness. Thereupon the demeanor of the man changed at once ;
he became cheerful and communicative, and, grinning maliciously, said: "All
right, if Bousquier knows much, I know still more." And in fact, he did know
more. He was a stammerer and took advantage of this defect to gain time for
reflection when his imagination halted, and every time he strayed into the
regions of the fabulous the keen-witted Monsieur Jausion led him gently back to
the path of reality. 
