Grammont, of coarse — no doubt it was Grammont; Bach in this relied upon the
information of the magistrate and upon glib Rumor — stuck the signed papers in
his pocket- book. In the meanwhile Madame Bancal cooked a supper, chicken with
vegetables, and veal with rice; an important detail, indicating the
cold-bloodedness of the murderers.  •Shortly before eight o'clock two drummers
came in, but the face of the host or of the strange gentleman displeased them ;
they thought they were in the way and left, where- upon the gate was locked.
But there was a knocking sev- eral times after that; the preconcerted signal
was three rapid knocks with the fist, and one after the other there entered the
soldier Colard with his sweetheart, the hump- backed Missonier, an aristocratic
looking veiled lady with green feathers in her hat, and a tobacco-dealer in a
blue coat. The hat with the green feathers was a special proof of Bach's powers
of invention, and stood out with pictur- esque verisimilitude against the
blue-coated tobacconist. 

At half past eight Madame Bancal went up to the attic to put her daughter
Madeleine to bed, and now Bastide Grammont explained to the old man that he
must die. The imploring supplications of the victim resulted only in the
powerful Bastide seizing him, and, in spite of his violent resistance, laying
him on the table, from which Bancal hastily removed two loaves of bread which
some one had brought along. Fualdes begged pitifully that he might be given
time to reconcile himself with God, but Bastide Gram- mont replied gruffly : '
' Reconcile yourself with the devil. ' 

Here M. Jausion interrupted the relation, and inquired whether a hand-organ had
not perchance at that moment commenced to play in front of the house. Bach
eagerly confirmed the supposition, and continued his report, which now wrought
up the narrator himself to a pitch of excite- ment and horror: Colard and
Bancal held the old man's legs, while the tobacconist and his sweetheart seized
his head and arms. A gentleman with a wooden leg and a three-cornered hat held
a candle high in the air.  The wooden-legged man uplifting the candle was like
an impious spirit from the nether world, and it was not necessary to dwell upon
the narrow chin, the sneer- ing mouth, the spectral eye. 

With a broad knife Bastide Grammont gave the old man a stab; Fualdes, by a
superhuman effort, succeeded in breaking loose; he sprang up and ran, already
mortally wounded, through the room ; Bastide Grammont, pursuing, seized hold of
him, threw him again on the table, the table rocked, one leg broke ; now the
dying man was placed upon two benches rapidly moved close to each other, and
Bastide Grammont thrust the knife into his throat. With the last groan of the
old man, Bancal came and his wife caught up the flowing blood in an earthen
pot; the part that ran on the floor was scrubbed up by the women. In the
pockets of the murdered man a five franc piece and several sous were found.
Bastide Grammont threw the money into the apron of the Bancal woman, saying: "
Take it! We are not killing him for his money." A key, too, was found; that
Bastide kept. Madame Bancal had a hankering for the fine shirt of the dead man,
and remarked covetously that it looked like a chorister's shirt; she was
diverted from her desire, however, on being presented with an amethyst ring on
Fualdes' finger. This ring was taken away the following day by a stranger for a
consideration of ten francs. 

When Bach's recital with all its circumstantiality and its simulated
completeness of strange and illuminating details became known, there lacked but
little to hailing the imagina- tive scamp as a deliverer. Indignation fed
belief, and criticism seemed treason. The public, the witnesses, the judges,
the authorities, all believed in the deed and all began to join in invention.
The half-witted Missonnier designated still another batch of persons whom he
had seen in the Bancal house, two notaries from Alby and a cook. In Rose Feral
's tavern, where all sorts of shady characters congregated, and old warlike
exploits and thieveries were the subjects of discussion, on the night of the
murder the talk fell upon the pillaging of a house, the property of a Liberal.
This report was designed to heighten the apprehension of the quiet citizens,
and that afterward all the conspirators, even well-to-do people, met in Bancal
's house gave no cause for astonishment. Everything harmonized in the
intricate, devilish plot ; in the clothes of the dead Fualdes no money, on his
fingers no ring, had been found ; Grammont had the bailiff in his house as late
as the seventeenth of March, and this circumstance, singled out at an opportune
moment from the quagmire of lies, inspired security. Bastide was hopelessly
entangled. The prisoners were thrown into a panic by the palpable agitation of
the people; each one appeared guilty in the other's eyes, each one was ready to
admit anything that was desired concerning the other, in order to exonerate
himself; they were ignorant of their fate, they lost all sense of the meaning
of words, they were no longer conscious of themselves, their bodies, their
souls ; they felt themselves encompassed by invisible clasps, and each sought
to free himself on his own account, without knowing what he had actually done
or failed to do. Every day new arrests were made, no traveler passing through
was sure of his freedom, and after a few weeks half of France was seized with
the intoxication of rage, a craving for revenge, and fear. 
