She was brought up in the country, in the old Chateau Perrie, which her father
had bought at the outbreak of the Revolution. Owing to the political upheavals,
and the un- certain condition of things, she did not enjoy the benefit of any
regular instruction in her childhood. The profound isolation in which she grew
up favored her inclination to romanticism. She idolized her parents; in the
agitated period of anarchy, the girl, scarcely fourteen years old, exhibited at
her father's side such a spirit of self-sacrifice and such devotion that she
aroused the attention of Colonel Mirabel, who, five years later, came and sued
for her hand.  She did not love him, — she had shortly before entered into a
singularly romantic relationship with a shepherd, — yet she married him,
because her father bade her. The union was not happy ; after three months she
separated from her husband ; the Colonel went with the army to Spain. At the
conclusion of the war he returned, and Clarissa received an intimation of his
desire that she should live with him; she refused, however, and declared her
refusal, moreover, in writing, incensed that he should have sent strangers to
negotiate with her. But she learned that he was wounded, and this caused a
revulsion of feeling. In the night, by secret passages, with ceremonious
formalities, the Colonel was carried into the chateau, and Clarissa tended him,
in a remote chamber, with faithful care. As long as it re- mained secret, the
new sort of relationship to the man as a lover fascinated her, but her mother
discovered every- thing and believed that nothing stood in the way of a com-
plete reconciliation between the pair. Clarissa succeeded in removing him; in a
thicket near the village she had nightly rendezvous with him. Colonel Mirabel,
however, grew weary of these singular doings ; he obtained a position in Lyons,
but died soon after from the consequences of his excesses.  Left completely to
herself, she indulged in the pleasure of indiscriminate reading, and her wishes
turned, with hidden passion, toward great expe- riences. Her peculiar tastes
and habits made her a subject of gossip in the little town ; she had children
and half -grown boys and girls come to the chateau, and recited poems to them
and trained them for acting. Her frank nature created enemies; she said what
she thought, offended with no ill intention, caused confusion and gossip in all
innocence, exaggerated petty things and overlooked great ones, took pleasure at
times in masking, appearing in disguise, and impersonating imaginary
characters, and captivated the susceptible by the charm of her speech, the
bright versatility of her spirit, the winning heartiness of her manner. 

She was now thirty-five years old ; but not only because she was so exceedingly
slender, small, and dainty, did she seem like a girl of eighteen — her nature,
too, was per- meated by a rare spirit of youth ; and when her eye rested,
absorbed and contemplative, upon an object, it had the clearness and dreamy
sweetness of the gaze of a child. She was a product of the border : southern
vivacity and north- ern gravity had resulted in a restless mixture ; she was
fond of musing, and, playful as a young animal, was capable of arousing in men
of all sorts desire mingled with shyness. 

The flood of reports concerning the death of the lawyer Fualdes left her, at
first, unmoved, although her father, by his purchase of the domain of La Morne,
seemed directly interested in the happenings, and new accounts were brought to
the chateau daily. The occurrence was too com- plicated for her, and everything
connected with it smelt too much of the unclean. Only when the name of Bastide
Ghrammont was first mentioned did she prick up her ears, follow the affair, and
have her father or the servants report to her the supposed course of events,
displaying more inter- est than astonishment.
