When in the imagination of the multitude the lady with the green feathers grew
steadily more distinct, along with the other figures implicated in the brutal
slaughter of poor Fualdes, Clarissa was thrown into a consternation with which
she only trifled at first, as if to test herself in a prob- ability or balance
herself upon a possibility, like a lad who with a pleasing shudder ventures
upon the frozen surface of a stream to test its firmness. She devoured the
repprts in the newspapers. The timorous dallying grew into a haunting idea,
chiefly owing to the fact that she really was the possessor of a hat with green
feathers. That circum- stance could not be regarded as remarkable. Fashion per-
mitted the use of green, yellow, or red feathers ; neverthe- less, the
possession of the hat became a torment to Clarissa.  She dared no longer touch
it; it seemed to her as if the feathers were enveloped in a bloody lustre, and
she finally hid it in a lumber-room under the roof. She busied her- self with
plans of travel, and meant to visit Paris ; but her resolution grew more shaky
every day. Meanwhile June set in. A traveling theatrical company gave a number
of performances in Rodez, and an officer by the name of Clem- endot, who had
long been pursuing Clarissa with declara- tions of love, but who had always, on
account of his com- monplaceness and evident crudity, been coolly, nay, at
times ignominiously repulsed, brought her a ticket and invited her to accompany
him to the theatre. She declined, but at the last moment she felt a desire to
go, and had to suffer Captain Clemendot's taking the vacant seat to her right,
after the rise of the curtain.  At the close of the last act a woman disguised
as a man appeared upon the scene ; she wore a pointed round hat, and a mask
cov- ered her face. A hurried love-scene, carried on in whispers, by the light
of the dismal lamp of a criminal quarter, with the chief of the band of
murderers, sealed the fate of the unhappy victim, who was kneeling in prayer.
In the house an eager silence reigned, all eyes were burning. Clarissa seemed
to hear the hundred hearts beat like so many ham- mers; she grew hot and cold,
every feeling of the real present vanished, and when, in the ensuing interval,
Cap- tain Clemendot in his half humble, half impudent way became importunate, a
shudder ran through her body, and at the fumes of wine which he exhaled she
came near faint- ing. Suddenly she threw back her head, fixed her gaze upon his
muddled, besotted countenance and asked in a low, sharp, hurried tone : ' '
What would you say, Captain, if it were I — I — who was present at the Bancal
house? " 

Captain Clemendot turned pale. His mouth opened slowly, his cheeks quivered,
his eyes glistened with fear, and when Clarissa broke into a soft, mocking, but
not quite natural, laugh, he rose and, with an embarrassed farewell, left her.
He was a simple man, as illiterate as a drummer, and, like everybody else in
Rodez, completely under the sway of the blood-curdling reports. When the
perform- ance was at an end, he approached Clarissa, who, with an impassive
air, was making her way to the exit, and asked whether she had been trying to
jest with him, and she, her lips dry, and something like a prying hatred in her
eyes, answered, laughing again: "No, no, Captain." After that her face resumed
its earnest, almost sad, expression and her head dropped on her breast. 

Clemendot went home with a disturbed mind, thoroughly convinced that he had
received an important confession. 
