It was not joking, however, that the gentlemen wanted, but earnest, The
Prefect, advised of what had happened, called in the evening on President
Seguret and had a brief interview with the worthy man, who, shaken to his
inmost soul, had to learn what a disgrace, to himself and her, his daughter had
conjured up, menacing thus the peace of his old age. Clarissa was called in;
she stood as if deprived of life before the two aged men, and the grief which
spoke in her father's every motion and feature struck her heart with sorrow.
She pleaded the thoughtlessness of the moment, the mad humor and confusion of
her mind; in vain, the Prefect openly showed his incredulity. Mon- sieur
Seguret, who in spite of his fondness for a jovial life, was of an exceedingly
suspicious disposition, lacking, too, a firm and clear judgment of men, could
not help regarding the depressed spirits of his daughter as a proof of guilt,
and he explained to her, with cutting severity, that the truth alone would keep
him from thrusting her from his heart. Clarissa ceased speaking; words rushed
in upon her like destroying demons. The President grew sleepless and agitated,
and wandered, distracted, about the castle all night long. His reflections
consisted in fathoming Clar- issa's nature on the side of its awful
possibilities, and he very soon saw her impenetrable character covered with the
blots and stigmas of the vice of romanticism.  Sleep was banished from
Clarissa, too. She surprised her father in the gray morning hours in his
disturbed wanderings through the rooms, and threw herself sobbing at his feet.
He made no attempt to console her or raise her ; to her despairing question as
to what she could be seeking in the Bancal house, since as a widow she was
perfectly free to come and go as she pleased and could dispense with secrecy,
the President 's reply was a significant shrug ; and so firmly was his sinister
conjecture imbedded, that upon her dignified demand for a just consideration,
he only flung back the retort: " Tell the truth." 

The news was not slow to travel. Relatives and friends of the President made
their appearance: amazed, excited, eager, malicious. To see the impenetrably
peculiar, elusively unapproachable Clarissa cast into the mire was a sight they
were all anxious to enjoy. A few of the older ladies at- tempted a
hypocritically gentle persuasion, and Clarissa's contemptuous silence and the
pained look of her eyes seemed to imply avowals. The Prefect came once more,
accom- panied by two officials. For the Government and the local functionaries
everything was at stake; the cry for revenge of the citizens, anxious for their
safety, the defiance and rancor of the Bonapartists, grew more violent every
day, the papers demanded the conviction of the guilty persons, the rural
population was on the point of a revolt. A wit- ness who had no share in the
deed itself, like Madame Mirabel, could quickly change and terminate
everything; persuasion was brought to bear, she was promised, as far as the
oath to which she subscribed in the Bancal house was concerned, a written
dispensation from Rome, and a Jesuit priest whom the Mayor brought to the
chateau expressly confirmed this. When everything proved vain and Clarissa
began to oppose the cruel pressure by a stony calm, she was threatonod with
imprisonment, with having her dis- grace and depravity made public through all
France.
