Clarissa believed she remembered having spent the even- ing of the nineteenth
of March with the Pal family, in Rodez; she believed she remembered that Madame
Pai herself remarked to her the following day : ' ' We were so merry yesterday,
and perhaps at that very time poor Fualdes was being murdered." Upon referring
to this, the Pals made a positive denial of everything ; they denied that
Clarissa had paid them a visit ; nay, in their vague, cowardly fright, they
even declared that they had been on bad terms with Madame Mirabel for years. 

To human pity spirits blinded by fear and delusion were no longer accessible.
Even had the sound sense of a single individual attempted resistance, it would
have been useless ; t he giant avalanche could not be stayed. A diabolical plot
was concocted, and it was the Prefect, Count d'Estournel, who perfected it in
such wise that it promised the best success. Toward one o'clock at night a
carriage drove into the castle grounds; Clarissa was compelled to enter it; the
President, the Magistrate, the Prefect, were her com- panions. The carriage
stopped in front of the Bancal house. Monsieur Seguret led his daughter into
the ground floor room on the left, a cave-like chamber, gloomy as a bad
conscience. On the shelf over the stove there stood a miser- able little lamp
whose light fell on two sheriff's officers and a lawyer's clerk, with stern
countenances, leaning against the wall. The windows were hung with rags, the
alcoves were pitchy dark, a mute silence reigned throughout the house.  Her
mind, confused and consumed with longing, turned a phantom image, the creation
of a thousand effer- vescent brains, into an actual experience. The half con-
sciously heard, half distractedly read, became a burning reality. Her existence
seemed strangely entangled in that of the man of the wood and dale, who had
ferventlv lifted his head to heaven, and sniffed in the air with the expres-
sion of a thirsting animal. Now she stood upon the bridge which led to his
domain; she beheld herself sitting at his feet, drops of blood from his
outstretched hand fell upon her bowed head. Consternation on the one hand, and
the most radiant hope on the other, seized her heart, while between there
flamed like a torch, there rang out exultant like a battle-cry, the name
Bastide Grammont, a plaything for her dreams. 

An expression of relief flitted over the faces of the men upon this first
syllable of a significant confession. Presi- dent Seguret covered his eyes with
his hand. He resolved in his heart to renounce his love for his misguided
child.  Clarissa felt it; all the ties which had hitherto bound her were
broken. 

She had, then, been in the room on the evening of the nineteenth of March? she
was asked. She nodded. How had she come there? questioned Monsieur Jausion
further, and his tone and mien were marked by a certain cautious- ness and
nicety, as if he feared to disturb the still timorous spirits of memory.
Clarissa remained silent. Had she come by way of the Rue des Hebdomadiers?
asked the Prefect. Clarissa nodded. "Speak! Speak!" thundered Monsieur Seguret
suddenly, and even the two sheriff's officers were startled. 
