It was this that wrung the cry from Clarissa's lips, and 
drove the mad merriment from her face. Not, indeed, be- 
cause she was forced to behold the former genius of the 
woods and wilds bound and shattered, but because she recog- 
nized as in a flash of lightning that that hand could not have 
wielded a murderous knife, that such a deed did not touch 
the circle of his being, even if he may have been capable of 
the act, and that all was in vain, an incomprehensible intoxi- 
cation and madness, an impenetrable horror, an exhibition 
of hypocrisy and disease. A dizziness seized her as if she 
were falling from a high tower. She was ashamed of her 
showy dress, its conspicuous finery, and in passionate excite- 
ment she tore the costly lace from her arms and, with an 
expression of the utmost loathing, threw it on the ground. 

Monsieur Jausion must have interpreted it differently. 
Again he smiled at Monsieur Pinaud, but this time in tri- 
umph, as if he would say: the sample tallies. " Do you 
know this lady, Bastide Grammont? " he asked the pris- 
oner. Bastide turned his head aside, and his look of care- 
less, bitter disdain cut Clarissa to the quick. " I don't 
know her," he replied gloomily, " I have never seen her." 

And once more Monsieur Jausion smiled, as if to correct 
a parsing error, and murmured: " That is not possible; 
Madame Mirabel, dressed at that time as a man, and with 
a hat with green feathers, was in the Bancal house, and 
was led by you yourself to the street, where you received 
her oath. I beg you to call it to mind." 

Bastide 's face contracted as if at the annoying persis- 
tence of a fly, and he repeated in a loud, energetic tone: 
11 I don't know the lady. I have never seen her." And 
his tightly compressed lips betrayed his firm resolve to 
remain silent. 

Monsieur Jausion adjusted his wig and looked troubled. 
" What answer have you to that, Madame? " he asked, 
addressing Clarissa. 

" He may not know that T saw him," she said in a 
whisper, but her voice had the penetrating quality of the 
chirping of a cricket.
Bastide turned toward her once more, and in the some- 
what oblique glance of his wearily brilliant eyes there was 
a mixture of curiosity and scorn, no more, however, than 
would be bestowed upon a mushroom or a spider. Inwardly 
he weighed, as it were, the slender, childlike form, won- 
dered casually at the agitation of her gestures, her flashing 
eyes, the helpless twitching of her lips, wondered at the 
lace lying on the floor, and thought he was dreaming when 
he became aware that an imploring gesture of her hands 
was meant for him. 

The magistrate sprang up and, with distorted face, cried : 
" Do not jest with us, Madame, it may cost you dear. 
Speak out, then! A forced oath is not valid! The peace 
of your fellow-citizens, the peace of the country is at stake. 
Free yourself from the spell of the wretched being! Your 
infamous smile, Grammont, will be laid to your account on 
the day of the sentence." 

Counselor Pinaud stepped forward and murmured a few 
words into the ear of Bastide, who lifted his arms, and 
with an expression of consuming rage pressed his clenched, 
chained hands to his eyes. Clarissa staggered to the 
magistrate's table, and while a deadly pallor overspread 
her cheeks, she shrieked: "It is all a lie! Lie! Lie! " 

Monsieur Jausion measured her from head to foot. 
" Then I place you in the position of an accused person, 
Madame, and declare you under arrest." 

A gleam of mournful satisfaction flitted over Clarissa's 
features. Swiftly, with the lightning-like wheeling of a 
dancer, she turned toward Bastide Grammont, looked at 
him as one looks up at a stormy sky after a sultry day, 
and with a pained, long-drawn breath, she called his name 
in a low voice. He, however, stepped back as if at an 
impure touch, and never before had Clarissa encountered 
such a glance and expression of disdain. Her knees shook, 
a feeling of distress overcame her, her eyes filled with 
tears. 
