 Shame and remorse overpowered her; even the 
mysteriousness of her position afforded her but slight con- 
solation. Controlled by no law, she seemed to have been 
shoved off the track upon which, in the ordinary course 
of nature, cause and effect, cumbrously linked together, 
crawl along in the slow process of experience. 

In accordance with her station, she had been assigned 
the best room in the prison. The first hours she lay on 
the straw-bed and writhed in agony. When the keeper on 
her urgent request brought a light, as she feared she would 
go insane in the darkness, the candle-light fell upon the 
image of Christ upon the cross with the crown of thorns, 
which hung upon the gray-tinted wall. She gave a shriek, 
her overstrained senses found in the features of the Saviour 
a resemblance to those of Bastide Grammont. His lips had 
had the same agonized curve when he pressed his clenched 
hands to his eyes. 

Once more she rebelled against the boundless injustice. 
To live with the world was her real element; her entire 
nature was attuned to a kindly understanding with people. 
She asked for paper and pen, and wrote a letter to the 
Prefect. 

" Justice, Count! " she wrote. " It is still time to pre- 
vent the worst. Remember the difficulty you had in extort- 
ing from me what was supposed to be the truth, remember 
the threats which made me compliant. I am a victim of 
circumstances. Whatever I confessed is false. No man of 
sense can discover the stamp of probability in my state- 
ments. In a freak of desperation I bore false witness. 
Tell my father that his cruelty is more sure to rob him of 
his daughter than her seeming transgression. Already I 
know not what I should believe, the past escapes my mem- 
ory, my confidence begins to totter. If it is too much to 
ask for justice, then I beg for mercy. My destiny seeks to 
try me, but my heart is clear as the day." 
The next morning many of the witnesses and 
prisoners were brought before Clarissa. Thus there were 
Bach, the Bancals, the soldier Colard, Rose Feral, Mis- 
sonier, and little Madeleine Bancal. Bousquier was ill. 
The sight of the crushed, slouching, phantom-like creatures, 
intimidated by a hundred torments, revengefully ready for 
any deed, disturbed her to the core, and gave her at the 
same time a feeling of indelible contamination. ' ' Is she 
the one ? ' ' each of the unfortunates was asked — and with 
insolent indifference they answered: "It is she." Mis- 
sonier alone stood there laughing like an idiot. 

Clarissa was amazed. She had not expected that the 
answers would be characterized by such assurance, such a 
matter-of-fact air. With inward sobs she held from her 
what was undeniable in the present situation, and shudder- 
ingly sought a path in her memory to that past situation 
on which the present was founded and which she was asked 
to verify. Her agitated spirit crept back to her earlier 
years, back to her youth, to her childhood, in order to dis- 
cover her inimical second-self ; that which had seemed weird 
and strange gradually became the essence and centre of 
her being, and the fateful night in Bancal's house turned, 
like the rest of the world, into a vision of blood and 
wounds. 

But athwart the gloomy fancies the way led to Bastide 
Grammont; a flowery path among burning houses. It 
seemed fine to her to be assured of his guilt, Perchance he 
had pressed his lips to hers before he had clutched the 
murderous knife. She coupled her own obscurely felt guilt 
with his greater one. That which cut him off from human- 
ity bound him to her. His reasons for the deed! She did 
not concern herself about them. No doubt it had struck 
root when she had first beheld him, when he had swallowed 
in a breath all the wood, all the springtime. No matter 
whether he dipped his hands in the sunlight or in blood, 
both pertained to his image, to her mysterious passion, and 
Fualdes was the evil genius and the destructive principle.
