The trial before the court of assizes was set for the six- 
teenth of October. At noon of the tenth, Clarissa requested 
an interview with Monsieur Jausion. Conducted before the 
magistrate, she declared she knew about the whole matter, 
and wished to confess everything. In a voice trembling 
with excitement, Monsieur Jausion summoned his clerks. 

" I came into the room and saw the knife glisten," 
Clarissa confessed. " I took refuge in the alcove, Bastide 
Grammont hurried after me, embraced and kissed me. He 
confided to me that Fualdes must die, for the old devil had 
destroyed his happiness and made life worthless to him. 
Bastide was intoxicated, as it were, with enthusiasm, and 
when I raised objections, he stopped my mouth with kisses 
once more, yes, he kissed me so hard that I could not offer 
any resistance. Then he had me take an oath, whereupon 
he left me and I heard a groaning, I heard a terrible cry; 
little Madeleine Bancal, who was lying in bed, raised her- 
self suddenly and wept. Then I lost consciousness, and 
when T regained it T found myself in the street." 

She reeounted this story in a mechanically measured 
tone; her voice had a metallic ring, her eyes were veiled 
and half closed, her Little hands hung heavy ;»t her side, 
and when she ceased she gazed before her with a pleased 
smile.
More and more silvery rang her voice, and finally she 
spoke like one transported or asleep. Her statement was 
read aloud to her; she affixed her signature calmly and 
without hesitation, whereupon Monsieur Jausion stated 
to her that she was free. 

In the chateau she was met by a hostile silence. The 
few domestics who remained whispered insolently behind 
her back. Nobody looked to her comfort, she had to fetch 
the pitcher of water herself from the kitchen. In the mean- 
time when President Seguret returned home, he already 
knew, as did the whole town, about Clarissa's confession. 
The circumstance of her amorous relation to Bastide shed 
a sudden light upon preceding events and wove a halo about 
her former silence. But Monsieur Seguret only hardened 
his heart all the more, and when he passed her as she stood 
on the threshold of her room, he turned away his head with 
a gesture of disgust. 

In the evening the President entertained a number of 
his friends. In the course of the meal the door opened and 
Clarissa made her appearance. Monsieur Seguret sprang 
from his chair, rage robbing him of speech. " Do not 
dare," he stammered hoarsely, " do not dare! " 

Regardless of that, Clarissa advanced to the edge of the 
table. A radiant, bewitching expression lit up her counte- 
nance. She turned her full gaze upon her father, so that 
he dropped his glance as if dazzled. " Do not revile me, 
father," she said gently in a tone of captivating entreaty.
