She turned to one of the guests with a commonplace question. The gentleman
addressed hesitated, seemed con- founded, astonished, but was unable to resist.
Her fea- tures, pallid from the prison atmosphere, had acquired something
dreamily spiritual ; the most ordinary word from her lips had a charm of its
own. 

The conversation became general ; the guests conquered, nay, forgot, their
secret amazement. Clarissa's wit and playful humor exercised a great
fascination. Along with them, there was a sensuously pungent air about her
which does not escape men, her gestures had something nattering, her eyes
glowed with a romantic fire. Disturbed, lending but a reluctant ear, Monsieur
Seguret could, nevertheless, not wholly evade the witchery which took his
guests cap- tive. A power stronger than his resolve forced him to leniency; he
took a timid share in the conversation, in spite of the heavy load upon his
heart. The talk turned upon politics, books, art, hunting, the war, nothing and
everything — a sparkling interchange of polished phrases and sparkling
reflections, of smiles and plaudits, jest and earnest. At times it seemed like
a scene in a play enacted with masterly skill, or as if a light intoxication
induced by champagne had exhilarated their spirits; each one was at his best
and strove to outdo himself, and Clarissa held and led them all, like a fairy
who upon a chariot of clouds guides a flock of pigeons. 

Shortly after midnight she rose, a fleeting, complacent, capricious smile
flashing across her face, and, with a rather affected bow, she left the room,
the men relapsing into a sudden, strange silence. Monsieur Seguret was agitated
when he conducted his guests to the door, and they left the chateau as silently
as thieves. 

The President strode up and down the entrance-hall awhile, his thoughts chasing
each other like a fleeing troop of wild animals.  As he was leaving the avenue
of yews, a streak of light fell across the path; Monsieur Seguret stepped upon
the low wall encircling a small fountain and could thus look into Clarissa's
room, the windows of which stood open. With difficulty he refrained from crying
out in astonishment on beholding Clarissa in a loose night- dress, dancing with
an expression of ecstasy and with passionate movements. Her eyes were tightly
closed, as if they were sealed, her eyebrows lifted in coquettish anxiety, her
shoulders rocked in a stream of inaudible tones whose tempo seemed now hurried,
now excessively slow. Suddenly she seized something and held it before her, —
it was a mirror; glancing into it, she recoiled with a shudder and let it fall,
so that the listener could hear the clinking of the broken glass; then she went
up to the window, tore her dress from her bosom, laid her hand upon her bare
breast and looked straight in the direction where Monsieur Seguret was
standing. He crouched down as if a gun had been aimed at him; Clarissa,
however, did not see him ; she fixed her gaze awhile upon the sweeping clouds
and then closed the window. The President remained standing at his post some
time longer and was unable to divert the current of his thoughts. Whom is she
deceiving?  he pondered, distressed — herself, or people in general, or God? 

For the first time in many days Clarissa enjoyed a peace- ful sleep once more.
Yet when she laid herself in her white bed the pillows seemed to assume a
purple hue and she fell into slumber as into an abyss. She dreamed of land-
scapes, of weird old houses, and of a sky that looked like clotted blood. She
herself wandered in the silvery light, and without feeling any touch or seeing
any human form, she nevertheless had a sensation of passionate kisses being
pressed upon her lips, and there was a stirring in her body as of life taking
shape. 

This strange mood and agitation endured for days after- ward. A silvery veil
lay between her and the world. 
