The crimson of the setting sun lit up her features, dis- torted by grief.
Behind Charlotte there stood a lady of portly build, with great warts on her
hands ; yet her face was thin, and her countenance as motionless as that of the
dead. She resembled a tree exuberant in strength, whose crown is blighted. 

Clarissa made a deprecatory gesture, yet she retained a friendly and calm air.
A second later, she thought she beheld herself in the kneeling figure, beheld
her double; and a cruel triumph filled her heart. " Have no care, my child,"
said she, smiling, in a low voice; " as far as Bas- tide is concerned,
everything is already settled." There- upon she opened the gate and walked into
the house.  Charlotte arose and gazed motionless through the grating. 

That night Clarissa retired early, but she awoke at four o'clock and began
dressing. She selected a black velvet dress, and, as her only ornament, she
fastened a diamond star in the edge of it at her bare neck. Her heart beat
faster the nearer the hour approached. At eight o'clock the carriage drew up;
it was a long drive to Alby, where the Court of Assizes sat. Monsieur Seguret
had ridden away early in the morning, nobody knew whither.  On the stroke of
ten President Enjalran, who was to preside at the trial, appeared in the
overcrowded hall, and after the reading of the lengthy indictment Bastide was
summoned to the hearing. 

Firm as if cast in bronze he stood before the judge's table. His answers were
cool, terse, and clear. From be- ginning to end he now saw through the
senseless fable, woven of stupidity and malice. By a biting sarcasm he showed
his unutterable contempt of all the accusations against him, thus placing the
counsel assigned to him at the last moment, with whom he stubbornly refused to
con- fer, in no slight embarrassment. 

Now and then he turned his glance toward the tall, church-like windows, and
when he caught sight of a bird that had alighted on the sill and dug his yellow
bill into the feathers on his breast, he lost his self-command for a moment and
his lips parted in pain. 

His examination lasted but a short time. It was only a matter of form, for his
fate was sealed. With Bach, Colard, and the other accomplices, Monsieur d'
Enjalran 's task was easy; their testimony was petrified, as it were. Bous-
quier had died in prison. Of the others, each one sought to grab at a little
remnant of innocence ; they produced the impression of men crushed and wholly
bereft of will-power.  A sensation was created by old Bancal, who became
hysterical during his examination, and then, protesting his innocence, behaved
like a madman. The humpbacked Missonier grinned when the question of his
presence at the murder was discussed; he had become brutalized by his long
imprisonment and the repeated examinations.  Rose Feral turned deadly pale at
the sight of the bloody rags on the Judge 's table, and could not utter a word.
Madame Bancal remembered that Mon- sieur Fualdes was dragged into her house by
six men, that he was made to sign a number of papers, crisscross, as she said.
The day following, she had found one of these bills, made out upon stamped
paper, but as it was stained with blood, had burned it. More than that she
positively refused to confess, met all questions with a stolid silence, and
declared finally that whatever else she knew she would confide to her confessor
alone. 

The witnesses testified placidly the most incredible things. Their memory was
so good that they recollected the hour and minute of the merest trifles, which
are for- gotten from one day to the next. In night and fog they had seen and
recognized people, their features, their ges- tures, the color of their
clothes. They had heard speaking, whispering, sighing, through thick walls. A
beggar by the name of Laville, who used to sleep in Missonier's stable, had
heard not only the organ-grinders but also four men carrying a burden,
something like men dragging a barrel.  Bastide Grammont laughed repeatedly at
statements which he declared to be shameless lies. When the Bancal woman began
her testimony he remarked that since it came so late he had expected that the
old woman would be delivered of it with still greater difficulty. To another
witness he repre- sented, in a vibrating voice, how the hand of Heaven rested
heavy upon her, and reminded her of the awful death of her child. He was like a
fencer whose opponent is the mist; nobody, indeed, replied to him, he stood
alone, the contradictions which he believed he had demonstrated remained there,
that w r as all. 
