 His mind refused to work; he asked him- self, horrified, whether this was
 still life, dared call itself life; Nature's glorious structure seemed to him
 ravaged like a wall rent by a storm, the speaking mouth of all these people
 struck him as nothing but a chasm convulsively and repellently opening and
 shutting, darkness invaded his spirit, he burned with a feeling of shame, he
 felt ashamed in the name of the nameless God, ashamed that his body was molded
 like that of these creatures around him. He had loved the world, had once
 loved the people in it ; now he was ashamed of them. It pained him to think
 that he had ever cherished hopes, buoyed up his heart with prom- ises, that
 sunshine and sky had ever been able to lure from him a joyful glance, sportive
 words a smile; he wished he had, like the stone by the wayside, never betrayed
 what he felt, so that he might not have been doomed to bear wit- ness before
 his own branded, scourged, unspeakably humili- ated self. Thought alone seemed
 offensive enough to him, how much more so what he could have said ; it was
 nothing, less than a breath. What could he depend upon? what hope for? They
 had no faith, not even in his scorn, not even in his silence. And Bastide
 locked himself up, and looked into the dawning countenance of Death. 

It was already growing dark when the King's evidence, Madame Mirabel, was
finally summoned to the court-room, and the whole tired assemblage started up
convulsively like a single body. She entered, and in spite of the close air of
the room, she seemed to be shivering. She trembled visibly on taking the oath.
Monsieur d' Enjalran urged her to testify in accordance with the truth. In a
strange, uniformly dull tone, yet speaking rather hurriedly, she repeated the
statement that she had made before the ex- amining magistrate. An oppressive
silence pervaded the hall, and her voice, in consequence, grew steadily lower.
She had also seen the mysterious stranger with the wooden leg, and noticed that
Bach and Bousquier unfolded a large white cloth. To the question why she had
appeared in men's clothes, she gave no reply. And when, with fingers
convulsively clasped, head bowed, her slender body bent slightly forward,
writhing almost imperceptibly, as if in the clutches of an animal, yet with
that blissful, sweet smile which lent her countenance an expression of subdued
madness, she related with bated breath how Bastide had embraced and kissed her
in the dark adjoining room, he sprang up suddenly, wrung his hands in despair
and made a few hurried steps until he stood at Clarissa's side. His heavy
breathing was audible to all. 

The presiding officer rebuked him for his behavior, which he designated as
indelicate, but Bastide cried in a firm, ringing voice: " Bef ore-God, who
hears me and will judge me, I declare that it is all an awful lie. I have never
as much as touched that woman or set eyes upon her." 

Clarissa turned as white as chalk. It seemed to her as if she had but just now
heard the clinking of the shattered mirror which she had dashed to the floor
after the dance.  When the prosecuting attorney asked her to continue, she
remained silent; her eyes rolled and her whole body shook convulsively. 

" Speak out! " exclaimed Bastide, addressing her, and indignation almost choked
his voice, " speak! Your silence is even more ruinous to me than all the lies." 

Clarissa lifted her eyes to him and asked with curious emotion: " Do you really
not know me, Bastide? " 

"No! no! no!" he burst out, and looking upward he mattered in distress: " She
is demented." 
