The public applauded. Clarissa reeled, however; an usher of the court hurried
to her side and caught her in his arms, a number of ladies left their places
and busied themselves about her, and half an hour elapsed before she regained
consciousness ; but her appearance was as changed as if she had suddenly aged
by twenty years. Monsieur d'Enjalran tried to continue the examination, but she
answered only in incoherent words; she did not know; it was possible; she did
not wish to contradict. Bastide Grammont had resumed his seat in the prisoner's
dock; immeasurable distress and consternation were pictured on his countenance.
His counsel bade Clarissa, since she had spoken, to continue. ' ' I adjure you,
Madame, make your- self clear," he said; " it depends upon you whether an
innocent man shall be saved or shall be sent to the scaffold. " Clarissa
remained silent, as if she had not heard; in her breast there surged, like
morning mist over the waters, a consoling and captivating image. Counselor
Pinaud now turned to her with a severe exhortation; she was not to think she
could make her assertions at will and suppress what she wished. The prosecuting
attorney spoke up for her, saying that the cause of her silence was known; she
herself had asserted that she entertained a conviction the grounds of which she
could not state ; it should suffice that she had uttered what was of the
greatest importance ; nay, he declared, moreover, that any further urging would
be improper. He had not concluded his speech when Clarissa interrupted him ;
raising her right arm she said in solemn protest: " I have taken no oath." 

Bastide Grammont looked up. Shaking off his stupor, he raised himself slowly
and began in a voice all the more affecting by its calmness: "Prison walls do
not speak.  And yet the time will come when they will find a voice and will
proclaim the secret means which have been employe* 1 to force all these
wretches to make lies a shameful bulwark of their lives. Fualdes was not my
enemy, he was only my creditor.  If you want a sacrifice, take me; I am ready,
but do not mingle my lot with that of this brood. My family, who have always
dwelt in the country, and have followed the customs and simple ways of rural
life, are disgraced. My mother weeps and is crushed.  Judge whether I, who am
plunged in this sea of misfortune, can still cherish a love of life. I loved
freedom once, I loved animals, the water, the sky, the air, and the fruits of
the trees ; but now I am dishonored, and if there were a future before me it
would be sullied with shame, and the time would have an ill taste. Is it a
court of justice before which I have been summoned? No, it is a hunt, the judge
has become a hunter and prepares the innocent one to be a tidbit for the
rabble. I ask no longer for justice, it is too late to mete out justice to me,
too late, were the crown of France itself to be offered to me. I surrender
myself to you to destroy me, your conscience will be loaded with that burden.
One guilty man makes many, and your chil- dren's children will for this flood
the living world with disgrace." 

A paralyzed silence succeeded these words. But sud- denly there burst forth an
indescribable tumult. The pub- lic and the jurors arose and clenched their
fists at Bastide Grammont, screamed and howled in wild confusion, Mon- sieur
d'Enjalran's exhortation dying away unheard. And just as suddenly a deathly
silence ensued. A faint, long- drawn cry which arose in the din, and now
continued its plaintive note, petrified the faces of the listeners. All eyes
tourned toward Clarissa. She felt the glances shower- ing down upon her like
the beams in a falling building.  Deeply moved, he laid his hand on the animal
's neck, and motioned the usher, who wanted to remove it, back with a
commanding gesture. 

When the court retired for consultation, no one dared speak above a whisper. A
woman sobbed and she was told to be quiet; it was the Benoit girl, Colard's
sweet- heart. She had wound her arms about the poor wretch's shoulders and her
tear-stained face expressed but one desire — to share his fate. A relative of
Bastide ap- proached him in order to speak to him ; Bastide shook his head and
did not even look at the man. A sort of drowsi- ness had settled on his
countenance — at any rate, words no longer carried any weight in his ears. Yet
it happened that he lifted his eyes once more and after coursing through
illimitable space they met those of Clarissa. Now the strange woman did not
strike him as so strange. He heard again the sound of her voice when she called
him murderer ; was it not rather a cry for help than an accusation? and that
beseeching look, as if invisible hands were clutching at her throat? and that
most delicate form so singularly free from indications of her age, quivering
like a young birch in autumn? 

Two lonely shipwrecked beings are driven by the cur- rents of the ocean to the
same spot, coming from opposite ends of the earth, unable to abandon the plank
upon which their life depends, unable even to grasp each other's hands, simply
driven by the gradually dying wind to unknown depths. There was something weird
in their mutual feel- ing of compassion.
