And the thousand little birds chirped in answer and then obediently stopped
singing. 

The lawyer wrapped a thick woolen shawl around his shoulders, for he was always
very cold, slipped his feet into his wadded boots, drew on his gloves, put his
fur cap on his bald head and went out of the house. 

It was still night and everything looked unreal and magical. Now and then the
grass would bow down with a sudden jerk, as people do in their sleep, if they
dream that they are falling, and then for a moment the lawyer would feel a warm
breath, which vanished as suddenly as it came. A confused mass of gray and
black clouds swept rapidly across the sky and at the zenith three golden stars
were visible in a line, so that they looked like a flying spear darting through
the clouds. The lawyer gazed thought- fully for some moments at the flying
spear while his mind struggled with some dim idea. Then he hurried with short
shuffling steps as quietly as possible along the sandy paths of the asylum
gardens. 

" Hush, keep still! " he whispered, as he passed some bushes in which something
was stirring.  But just then began a great fluttering and stirring in an elder
bush. Hundreds of little birds suddenly thrust their heads out between the
leaves and chirped to the lawyer.  The lawyer went quietly from bed to bed and
watered his flowers. He stopped frequently to draw a deep breath and gazed up
at the sky, where the motionless golden spear still seemed to be darting
through the clouds. He pon- dered for some time over that and shook his head.
From the " violent ward " came a longdrawn wailing, which at regular intervals
was merged in pitiful weeping. But the lawyer paid no attention to these
sounds. He only heard the birds fluttering their wings and whetting their beaks
in the bushes.  He hunted up a couple of little pebbles on the path and threw
them, one at a time, into the dark kitchen, laughing softly to himself. They
really must learn to be more care- ful. 0, he would soon teach them to put the
bread crumbs regularly on the window-sill. There was plenty of gravel on the
path. And what if they had already complained so often! 

The watering-pot was empty and in the gray light of dawn the lawyer walked back
to the well. 

Ever since his wife's death the poor man had been a friend of birds and
flowers. When she was dying, she had said, with her last breath, " The flowers
must always be watered and the birds must always be fed." Those had been her
last words and the lawyer heard them ringing in his ears day and night. He
heard them in every breeze, in every conversation, even when all was silent
they were wafted to him. In his wife's room there had stood a dark, heavy
clothes press (which, oddly enough, he could still remember), and this large,
dark object also repeated his wife's last words, although it made no sound
whatever.  The lawyer continued to live in seclusion and solitude, and watered
the flowers in the window-boxes and fed and watered the birds in the cages. The
flowers withered and the birds died, one by one. The lawyer took no notice of
his loss. Indeed it seemed to him as if the birds were hopping and twittering
gaily in their cages. They hatched their young and kept on increasing. And the
lawyer took a childlike pleasure in this increase. Finally there were hundreds,
thousands, whose chirping he heard from morn- ing till night. They lived in the
walls, on the ceiling, every- where. And the good man could not understand why
others neither saw nor heard them. 

As the sun rose, the lawyer had already finished a good part of his day's work
and turned back to the ward, which looked like a country cottage standing in a
pretty garden.
