Michael Petroff glanced at his guest while four deep lines suddenly appeared on
his forehead. " This teacher," he went on, " was sentenced to four years'
imprisonment, only think — four years. He had ten mouths to feed and he
embezzled some funds. Voila tout! What do you think of that ! Ha, ha ! That is
the way of the world, you see !  In my petition I demand not merely that the
sentence should be revoked, but also that officers' salaries should be
increased. I demand it — I, Captain Michael Petroff, and I shall also appear in
the Non-Partisan. You will see, my friend! " Michael Petroff cast a fearless,
triumphant glance at the little baldheaded lawyer, who listened and nodded,
although he did not quite understand what the Captain meant. 

" You do a great deal of good! " he whispered, nodding, while a childish smile
flitted t)ver his sad, pale little face.  And after a moment's reflection he
added, " You are a good man. You surely are! " 

Michael Petroff shook his head. " I do ray duty! " he declared earnestly. And
laying his hand on his heart while his clear steel-blue eyes flashed, he added
: ' ' My sacred duty! " 

Captain Michael Petroff, former officer in a St. Peters- burg regiment,
considered it his life work to plead for justice in this world. He called
himself " The Tribunal of right and justice." He subscribed for two large daily
papers, and searched them every day for cases in which, according to his
judgment, injustice had been done to some one. And every day Michael Petroff
found cases.  Cases and nothing but cases.  He often sat up late in his office,
as he called his room, or in his editorial sanctum, as he sometimes designated
it in an undertone when speaking to his confidential friend.  There he would
sit and write, in a hand as neat as copper- plate, his memorials, protests,
petitions, which he delivered every day at six o'clock to the head physician,
Dr. Marz.  who had undertaken to forward them regularly. Dr. Marz was glad to
receive these manuscripts which he laid in a separate pigeonhole, in order to
use them from time to time as material for his work on Graphomania. 

The little time that this activity left him, Michael Petroff employed in
editing his newspaper. And it was because of this paper that he sometimes
secretly referred to his room as "his editorial sanctum. " This newspaper did
not appear regularly, but only when it happened to be ready.  It usually
appeared once a year, but sometimes twice, if his nervous condition urged him
to greater haste. 

Michael Petroff 's paper was a fairly accurate represen- tation of an ordinary
daily paper, from the heading, in which the conditions of subscription were
stated, as well as the name of the city in which the paper appeared — the city
was arbitrarily chosen by Michael Petroff — to the fictitious names of the
publisher and editor. Like any other paper, it contained advertisements, which
Michael Petroff simply cut out of other papers, a leading article, and
contributions. The whole editorial part, however, was engaged — with the
exception of a few articles which were slipped in as a disguise — with the
question: Is the con- finement of Michael Petroff, Captain in the Russian army,
justified? The titles of the separate articles varied from year to year,
although the ideas expressed in them were similar.  He went to the door and
cleared his throat and listened.  Then he stepped out into the corridor,
coughed, looked up and down and came back satisfied. He drew out the edi-
torial drawer, the key of which he wore around his neck, and with a happy laugh
began : ' ' The very latest ! Listen !  This cannot fail to have its effect.
Just hear the headline : Doctor Marz arrested! " 

" Dr. Marz arrested? " whispered the lawyer anxiously, looking up at Petroff in
open-mouthed astonishment. 

Michael Petroff laughed. 

" Arrested? No, of course not. I go on to explain in the article that Dr. Miirz
is going to be arrested, and that the only way for him to escape arrest is to
give Michael Petroff his discharge immediately." 

The lawyer nodded. " I see," said he, smiling because he saw Petroff looking so
cheerful. And yet he was not thinking anything about Petroff 's article, but
only that he must give the birds their water. He grew restless and started to
rise. 
