One was his birthday, the sixteenth of May. Michael Petroff never forgot it. On
May sixteenth he would walk about with an important air, and looking about him
he would say to every one he met: " This is my birthday.  I thank you for your
good wishes ! ' ' The attendant always came before dinner and asked him to come
to Dr. Marz's room to receive his congratulations. 

Then Michael Petroff would go, with quick, light steps to Dr. Marz's parlor,
shake hands with him and thank him for the wonderful bouquet of white roses
that Dr. Marz gave him. 

Michael never suspected where the bunch of white roses came from. He did not
know that, on his birthday, his wife and daughter stood behind the portiere of
the parlor, nor that they made the long journey every year to see him.  The
first few years the Captain's wife had had golden hair, but it had gradually
turned gray, and now it was white, although she was still quite a young woman.
Formerly she used to come alone, but for three years past she had always been
accompanied by a young lady, who wept bit- terly when she arrived and when she
went away. This young lady had but one ear and concealed the disfigure- ment by
the way in which she dressed her hair. Michael Petroff had cut off her other
ear when she was only a child, during the first outbreak of his malady. 

Michael Petroff chatted and laughed pleasantly with the head physician and
carried the roses to his friend, the lawyer. 

" Here are some flowers for you. I do not want them ! " 

The lawyer's eyes opened wide with delight, and he took the roses carefully as
if they were fragile. 

Michael Petroff 's second great day was that on which his newspaper appeared. 

The paper was always printed in the town.  The porter delivered the manuscript
to the printer and brought back the twenty-five printed copies to Michael
Petroff. And then for a few days he was in a state of the greatest excitement.
He sent the paper to the doctors, especially to Dr. Marz, and waited in
suspense to see what effect it would have. At such times he could not work, but
wandered about the house and garden all day. If he met a doctor, he would stop
and cast a triumphant glance at him, smiling as if secure of victory.  Then for
a few days Michael Petroff would wander dis- consolately about, and his
depression might even bring on melancholia or frenzy. But after a few davs he
would always regain his cheerful spirits. He would greet his friends, and
apologize for his disagreeable behavior. And immediately he would begin to plan
out another newspaper.  This time it must surely be a success. Take care, Dr.
Marz ! 

Such was Michael Petroff, Captain in the Russian army.  And thenceforth he
suffered from the strange and terri- ble delusion that he was the centre of the
universe and that it was his task to keep the whole world in equilibrium.  The
myriad forces of all creation were united in him and he felt with agonizing
constancy, how the suns and the planets were circling about him, and how
everything was rushing and whirling through space. If a chain of skaters
revolves around one man who is in the middle, that man will feel the
extraordinary force with which the two rush- ing wings whirl around him, and he
will be obliged to exert all his strength to maintain his position. Engelhardt
felt precisely so and since his efforts were unremitting, his delusion
exhausted him to such an extent, that in one year he had aged as if in ten.
Even if — so he said — the heavenlv bodies had been so marvelouslv ordained by
the almighty Creator, that through all eternity they revolved in their
foreordained circles and spirals (as he said), yet he suffered beyond endurance
from the slightest disturb- ance in outer space. During the winter he had been
unable to sleep for two weeks, because a swiftly moving star was pulling at
him. Curiously enough, at this very time a comet appeared which astonished all
the astronomers. 
