But now again his task was wearing him out more every day and his powers were
failing rapidly. The shooting stars and the swarms of meteors dragged at him,
until he became dizzy, and especially the moon exerted at this period a
terrible power over him. It sucked in his strength, and Engelhardt imagined
that at any moment the ground might give way beneath him and he might sink into
the depths and the whole universe might collapse above him. 

When Michael PetrofT and the little lawyer entered Engelhardt 's room, after
vainly knocking at the door for some time, they found him in bed, with his thin
hairy hands lying helplessly on the coverlet. He was gazing directly upward,
and indeed his eyes were rolled up so far that the whites showed, and he seemed
to be looking fixedly at some special point in the ceiling. His face was of a
somewhat yellowish tone and gave the impression of being made of porcelain, the
skin was so smooth and the bones were so prominent. His forehead was uncommonly
large in pro- portion to his small face and mouth, which was drawn together as
if ready to whistle and was surrounded by many little lines centering at the
lips. The shoemaker had wasted away so during the year that the collar of his
bright colored shirt stood out a finger's breadth from his thin neck. 

"Good morning!" said Michael PetrofT gently and cheerfully. " Here are some
friends to see you! " The lawyer remained timidly standing in the doorway. 

Engelhardt did not answer. A shudder passed over him, and his thin hairy hands
twitched from time to time, as if he were receiving an electric shock of
varying strength. 

Michael PetrofT smiled and came toward him. " How are you, my dear friend? "
said he softly and sympa- thetically, bending over Engelhardt. " Did the Doctor
come to see you last night! " Michael Petroff straightened up again and glanced
at the little lawyer. " He says that he has come to the end of his strength,
our poor friend. He needs a new soul — like that time in the winter, when the
attendant died, don't you remember? " And he shouted into the ear of the
sufferer, unnecessarily loud : "I will speak with the Doctor, Friend
Engelhardt. This is the Doctor's business.  In one way or another he will get
you a soul ! ' ' 

But the little lawyer suddenly wrapped himself closer in his shawl. He was as
cold as ice. Ordinarily very few impressions remained in his memory, but he
still remem- bered clearly the death of the attendant Schwindt — and how
Michael Petroff had come to his room and whispered mysteriously in his ear: "
The attendant is dead. Engel- hardt has taken his soul, don't you see! " So now
he was horrified at the thought that Engelhardt might perhaps demand his soul,
and there was nothing that he feared moro than death. 

Death dwelt in his confused sick brain as a figure that was invisible all but
the hands. Suddenly, Oh so suddenly, it would si and near him, close by his
side. And a horrible chill would stream forth from the dread form, and all the
flowers, while with frost, would die, and the millions of swifl little birds
would fall frozen through the air, and he himself' would be changed into a
little heap of snow.  Michael Petroff looked at him in astonishment. " What is
the matter, my dear fellow?" he drawled, smilingly.  "Are you afraid? Why
should you be, I wonder? I shall go at once to Dr. Marz and explain to him what
Engelhardt requires. From what I know T of him, he will not delay, and so
everything will be attended to. I would gladly place my own soul at your
disposal, Friend Engelhardt, but I still need it myself — I have a mission to
fulfil, you know — I am Napoleon, and I fight a battle every day, I am — " But
here he paused suddenly and listened. 

" The Doctor is coming! Don't you hear him? " he whispered. " He will be here
immediately — " 

Dr. Marz had come into the ward. He could be heard speaking with some one in
the corridor, and the three men in the shoemaker's room listened. The Doctor's
voice was the only one which had the power to change the current of their
thoughts and to give them hopes, great hopes, indefinite though they were. It
affected them somewhat as a voice affects wanderers, who believe that they are
lost in a solitary wilderness. And yet Dr. Marz did not talk much, but he had
become a master of the art of listening, and would pay attention for hours
every day to the com- plaints, the lamentations, and the hundreds of requests
of his patients. But a few words from him had the power to encourage, to
comfort, to cheer and to influence the mood of his patients for the whole day. 

Suddenly the lawyer ceased to shiver, Michael Petroff began to laugh happily,
and Engelhardt withdrew his gaze from the point in the ceiling and looked
toward the half open door. He gazed so intently that his small bright eyes
seemed to squint. 

" Listen ! The Rajah is talking with him ! " said Michael Petroff, holding up
his finger for silence. 
