And a deep and almost gentler voice replied : "I heard the watchman walking
back and forth before my door all night, Sir. And I also heard the drum when
the watch was relieved." 

' ' My friend, ' ' answered the Doctor, ' ' You must have been dreaming." 

" No," continued the man whom Michael Petroff had called the " Rajah," " I
excuse you, Sir, because I know that vou are onlv doing vour dutv. But vour
tact ought to prevent you from carrying out your precautions in such an obvious
way. I have given you my word of honor not to make any attempt to escape. I
want you to tell that to the English government, by whose authority you are
keeping me here in confinement. Neither have I any weapons concealed in my
room. I want you to search it." 

" I know that perfectly well, my friend !" 

"All the same, I want you to search." 

And the "Rajah" would not be satisfied until the Doctor had promised that his
room should be searched immediately. 

During this conversation Dr. Marz had appeared in the doorway, with the " Rajah
" just behind him. Dr. Marz was a small man, dressed in a light-gray suit, with
a ruddy beardless face and a quick, searching but gentle eye, while the " Rajah
" stood behind him, tall and dark, and almost filling up the doorway. The "
Rajah " had a long black beard and a fearless, dark brown face, in which the
whites of his eyes showed strikingly. 

The " Rajah " was simply a teacher, who had taught for a few years in India in
a German school. A protracted fever had caused an incipient delusion, which,
after his return to his native land, took entire possession of him. He imagined
himself to be an Indian prince, who had been exiled by the English government. 

He was extremely silent and reserved, and never talked with the other patients.
His bearing expressed an in- scrutable calm and an apparently quite natural
pride.  For days together he would favor no one with a glance.  He would walk
up and down the garden, very slowly, gazing scornfully at the flowers and
trees, and every even- ing, if the weather permitted, he would sit apart on a
bench and gaze at the sinking sun, turning his dark face toward it until it
disappeared. And as he gazed at the setting sun, an obscure, wistful sorrow
glowed in his dark eyes. For he saw palm trees, that seemed to melt into the
sun, so that only their tops showed, edged with flame, while their trunks were
invisible — and elephants, stepping proudly, with their little brown mahouts
upon their necks — and glittering golden temples, and crowds of dark, half
naked natives, trotting along with branches in their hands, and uttering shrill
cries — and then too, he saw himself, going on board the steamer that was to
carry him into exile, while the dark people threw themselves down on the quay
and wept. The " Rajah's " soul was filled with deep and bitter sorrow, and he
rose and held his broad shoulders more erect, as if he were bearing a heavy
burden. And he bore it ! The " Rajah " never complained, never showed
despondency, nor did he ever show any sign of what was taking place within him. 

Even in his own room he behaved tranquilly. Very rarely was he heard to speak,
and only once in a while — in his sleep — would he utter a long-drawn singing
cry, such as street venders use in the Orient. 

As Dr. Miirz entered the room, the little baldheaded lawyer bowed, with his cap
in his hand, and stood modestly against the wall. His gratitude knew no bounds,
because the Doctor allowed him to live quietly and peacefully among his flowers
and birds, without ever asking him to pay anything. So today he did not even
venture to ask Dr. Marz for crumbs for the birds nor to complain of the
negligence of the maids in the kitchen, although he had fully determined to do
so. 
