To express his respect, he bowed low to the " Rajah," and since the latter did
not notice him, he bowed once more, moving his lips in a whisper. But the "
Rajah " did not vouchsafe him a glance. For a moment the lawyer thought of
approaching and kissing the " Rajah's " hand. For he recalled a cir- cumstance
that had been sharply impressed upon his memory: One evening he had met the "
Rajah" in the corridor and had bowed to him. They had been quite alone.  The "
Rajah " had come toward him and had said in a deep, mysterious voice, " My
loyal subject! " and had given him his hand to kiss. " Wait! " the " Rajah "
had con- tinued, " I will show my favor to you. I have very little of the
treasure left, that I brought with me into exile, but — here, take this." And
the " Rajah " had slipped a little gray stone into his hand. 

Michael PetrofT, on the contrary, looked smilingly and questioningly at Dr.
Marz, while he stood politely back against the door. Meanwhile he tipped his
head somewhat backward and sidewise and looked at the Doctor, as if he expected
some very special news from him and as if he knew quite well that Dr. Marz had
such news for him today.  So confidently did he look at him, while a smile
played about his pretty boyish mouth. 

But Engelhardt, whose brows were drawn up with pain as if they were fastened
with rivets, had half sat up in bed and was explaining his needs and his
sufferings to the Doctor. He spoke in a guttural tone, rapidly, in a murmur
that was hard to understand, and his voice sounded like the distant barking of
a dog, heard on a still night. 

Ee had come to the end of his strength — the moon was drawing ;if him! — in the
night thousands of people had begged him on their knees not to give them up to
destruc- tion — only a new soul could give him back his strength — he felt that
he was bending over more and more to the left and the whole universe might
collapse at any moment: all this lie muttered indistinctly, confusedly, his
distressful eves fixed pleadingly upon Dr. Marz.

And because they were all listening so earnestly — espe- cially the " Rajah,"
whose large brilliant eyes were fixed upon Engelhardt — the little lawyer was
once more seized with fear. He felt as if his legs were sinking through the
floor, as if in a swamp, but just when this fear was about to overwhelm him
like black darkness, a bird lit on the window-sill and chirped, and the lawyer
seemed suddenly transformed. 

* ' I am coming ! " he whispered hurriedly. 

1 * Don't go! " said Michael PetrofT softly, taking hold of his arm. " Where
are you going? " 

" He was calling me! " answered the lawyer and slipped quickly away. 

" How he is hurrying! " thought Michael PetrofT, and heard himself laughing
inwardly. And presently he said to Dr. Marz, laying his hand confidentially on
his shoulder : " The lawyer is certainly a clever, well educated man — and yet
he thinks that the birds call him ! Between you and me, Doctor, hasn't it ever
occurred to you, that he is not quite right — ? " 

After luncheon Dr. Marz's patients went out into the garden as usual. They
trotted along in little groups, one after the other, round and round the
biggest flower bed, at equal distances, silently, lost in thought. Only the
"Inventor," a young man, sometimes paused, rested his hand on his side, put his
other hand to his forehead and gazed steadily at a point on the ground. 

The lawyer was watering his flowers and listening de- lightedly to the
thousands and thousands of birds that were hopping in the bushes and treetops.
Michael PetrofT was in high good humor. There was news — ! Just listen!  Just
listen! He was smoking a cigarette that Dr. Miirz had given him, and was
enjoying every whiff of it.
