Everything gave him pleasure.  Even walking was a delight to him. His steps
were short, his knees sprung playfully; and he felt with delight how his toes
crackled a little and how the elastic balls of his feet rebounded in his thin
soled shoes from the ground, while his heels touched the path but lightly and
his knees swung. When he stood still, he set the muscles of his thighs, by a
certain pressure of the knees, and then enjoyed the firmness with which he
stood there like a statue. He was convinced that nothing could have knocked him
down.  He walked along smiling and glancing cheerfully about him, as if to
share his happiness. He greeted everyone, and whenever he met an acquaintance
he would tell him the great event that had happened today. 

" Just hear this, mv friend! " he called out to the little lawyer, who was
standing on the lawn, stooping over a tulip bed to water the flowers in the
middle of it. " Do come over here ! There is such news ! Oh, please do come ! '
' 

He waited with friendly impatience until the lawyer had finished and came back
to the path, meaning to go back to the well with his empty green can. " I want
to tell you what has happened today," he began hastily, " His Majesty the king
of Saxony has condescended — " 

" Pardon me," the lawyer interrupted him in a whisper and started to leave him,
" I am in a hurry. It is hot and the flowers are drying up." 

" I will walk to the well with you," continued Michael Petroff good humoredly,
and walked rapidly beside the departing lawyer. " He looked at me and thought a
while. 'Oh yes,' he said, ' I had almost forgotten. A document did come for
you. It is about that carpenter, you know, Captain. ' 'A carpenter, Doctor? I
don't remember ' — so I took out my memorandum book, in which I enter all the
documents that I send out: 'Where did the answer come from?  From Saxony? Ah! '
said I, ' then it must be about the butcher 's apprentice who was condemned to
death. ' ' Yes, ' said the Doctor, ' that is it. The fellow was a butcher's
apprentice.' And now listen, my friend. Because of my petition, his Majesty the
King of Saxony has condescended to pardon him. I must write a letter of thanks
to His Majesty this very day." 

" How the sun burns today," the lawyer responded to Michael Petroff 's tale,
and began to work the pump handle.  "All the flowers look so wilted." 

' ' Ha, ha ! " laughed Michael Petroff. ' ' You 're not listening at all, are
you ? ' ' 

No, the lawyer was not listening. He was looking into his can to see if it was
full. 

Michael Petroff looked at him a while with his head on one side, then he
laughed quietly to himself and walked rapidly away. He glanced about the garden
in search of some one to whom he could tell his cheerful tale. 

Just then he espied the " Rajah," who was walking up and down in the vegetable
garden between two beds of lettuce. According to his habit, the " Rajah " was
alone, and in a place where no one else would be apt to come. 

Michael Petroff rose up on tiptoes and considered whether he had better, with
one jump, spring over the beds, which separated him by about a hundred paces
from the " Rajah." He would only have to soar upward a very little and he would
be there. But he was afraid of being impolite to the " Rajah " or perhaps of
startling him, so he gave up the idea.  Tho " Rajah " looked at him and wont
on, with his usual quiet pride : " Since you write, you must understand. And
you surely must have gained knowledge of men and things from sacred books,
which are closed to the rest of us, and you must have passed your life in
meditation, according to tho rules of your caste.
