Thorough depravity prevailed not among the nobility alone; the burgher
city-councillors too were tainted with the greed for power, the greed for gold,
and the evil passions of such parentage; even to the lower ranks the corrupted
manners were now spreading. How well for our poet that his father's house was
islanded safe from the infec- tion, an abode of noble discipline, of austere
dignity.  Goethe's father was the son of Friedrich Georg Goethe, a journeyman
tailor, who, leaving Artern on the Unstrut, a Thuringian river, finally rested
from his many wanderings in Frankfurt, and there, in his thirtieth year (1687),
took to wife Anna Elizabeth Lutz, herself a tailor's daughter. She died in
1700, and after five years of single life, Friedrich Georg wedded the widow
Cornelia Schelhorn, owner of the inn Zum Weidenhof, and still comely in her
seven and thirtieth year.  One who knew this grandfather of the poet describes
him as courteous, of thorough musical attainment, but off his head with pride.
The third and last child of this marriage, Johann Kaspar Goethe, the father of
the poet, was born July 27, 171 o. He went for his education in letters to the
grammar- school (Padagogium) of Coburg. During this absence his father and
elder brother died. At Leipzig and Giessen he studied law with diligence; then,
according to the custom of the time, was occupied in the Reichskammergericht at
Wetzlar; finally, at Giessen, won his Doctor of Laws with a masterly
dissertation. Urged by a passion for knowledge, he then journeyed to Italy;
bringing with him many works of art, rich in store of facts and memories, he
then travelled probably through France and Holland, and came to his own city.
There, resolved to spend the rest of his life in her service, he tried for an
inferior civic office; he would take it without salary, if the customary
balloting might in his election be dispensed with—a distinction which he
thought fairly due to his well- known qualifications. But the Council would not
consent; there being, they said, no sufficient reason for departure from
custom. So hurt was the Doctor of Laws by this, that he vowed never to accept
any civic post. By Kaiser Karl VIL, of unlucky memory, he was raised to the
dignity of actual (wirklicK) imperial councillor; and this cut off all
possibility of entering the service of his mother-town, since he now was as
high in rank as its highest office-bearers.  Not till universal peace1 seemed
at hand did Johann Kaspar begin to look about him in earnest for a wife worthy
of him. She must be one bright with the perfect bloom of health, fit to bring
forth vigorous sons and daughters; and she must belong to an old, not wealthy,
burgher family of high dignity. Now Johann Wolfgang Textor, first in point of
seniority among the sheriffs and imperial councillors, had lately—August 10,
1747—been raised to the prime dignity of the city—the Chief Magistracy. He was
grandson of the famous jurist—also Johann Wolfgang Textor—who had, in 1690,
been summoned to Frankfurt as First Syndic; he was son of Christoph Heinrich
Textor, Advocate and Councillor to the Elector Palatine. Since the chief
magistrate was of burgher descent, and not very rich, Johann Kaspar Goethe, now
almost eight and thirty, sought in marriage his eldest daughter, Katharina
Elizabeth Textor, just seventeen on the 19th of February 1748.  To the young
girl it was part of the order of things; she did not hesitate even at thought
of going with this grave, dignified, well-to-do husband to the house of his
mother, Cornelia Goethe, who still, at eighty, bore the household cares. The
honoured widow had fifteen years before bought for herself and her descendants
a house on the Hirschgraben, and an adjoining building with great cellars, in
which there was plenty of room for the good wine left from former inn- keeping.
She must have been rich, for since 1744 she had paid 200 florins annual
assessment So on August 20, 1748, Wolfgang's father and mother were married.
Only two months before his son's birth Johann Kaspar was enrolled as burgess.
But though he became the Frankfurt representative of one of the countless
German princes of the time, he did not enter his name on the list of advocates:
he wished, in retirement, free from business, to live for self- culture and for
his family.
