With such prosaic records of descent Councillor Goethe longed for a son—always
thought of as a lawyer—of intellectual greatness to give the one thing
lacking—distinction—to the already wealthy family. And what a splendid reality
was to crown his hope, differing much indeed from what he looked for; nothing
could be less his thought than that he should give to Germany—to the world—a
poet, with genius divinely lighting up all things, of undying fame.  Though the
young mother—hardly more than a child— brought up to obedient ways, had
accepted her upright, re- spectable husband without loving him, it was with
firm reliance for her welfare on his unwavering affection and the Divine care.
Nature had given her beautiful gifts,—a heart, noble, tender, ardent;
perception, vivid, interested; healthy naturalness in feeling and act; a joyous
trust in God. And none of these good gifts had been spoiled or wasted in a
happy girlhood spent under the loving care of a young mother, of whom she was
the firstborn, at only twenty, by a husband eighteen years older. On the
contrary, the eager animated goings-on in the life of her native city—very much
stirred just at that time— would quicken and widen emotions and sympathies,
would develop character. As to things learned in school and from masters
indeed, her education was limited; music and singing alone she had brought to
considerable proficiency. When between ten and eleven, an ecstatic reverence
for Kaiser Karl VIL—handsome and good and unlucky—possessed the little maid;
twice the emperor had to make a considerable stay in Frankfurt when his capital
Miinchen was in the hands of the enemy; even more than reverence, a secret love
for him grew in the childish soul, such close ties bound him with her native
city, he was crowned by disaster with such a wondrous halo.  She used to think
he noticed her, especially at a time when he often came through the
Friedbergergassc, where the Textors lived in a castellated house, and used to
send greetings and glances to their windows.  And when she learnt the death of
her beloved emperor,—he died January 20th 1745—the keenest sorrow pierced her
soul. Two hours every day till four weeks were spent, the solemn bells tolled
remembrance of the dead, and their mournful noise shook her with terrible
throbbings.  But the pain of the young soul thus living in fantasy was soon
assuaged by warm influences from an external world full of sunny brightness,
for time brought good things to her house.  In her seventeenth year came the
quite unexpected elevation of her father to the Chief Magistracy, the highest
dignity of the city.  Named Johann Wolfgang after an ances- tor of honoured
memory; how much greater was this first sapling of the united houses of Textor
and Goethe to make the name. Kind Nature gave the boy her best gifts. By his
mother came above all that feeling heart, without which, as after many years he
himself said to Lavater,1 no man is supremely great in the world of practice or
in creative art, and the place of which cannot be filled by merely intellectual
power. Beaming through his clear brown mother's eyes his spirit like hers was
noble, tender, warm, passionate; though like hers it healed rapidly from the
deepest wounds. By his young mother, too, came his active imagination, vivid
percep- tion, healthy naturalness, and that joyous trust in God which speaks in
the noble words to Lavater, "God, to whom I have ever been true, has blessed me
abundantly in secret"2 Like his mother, the boy apprehended easily and quickly;
like her too in capacity for silent enjoyment, he was yet insatiable in hunger
for ever new impressions. His genius called unceas- ingly for fresh experience
to assimilate and to grow by; and as it consumed rapidly, soon exhausted the
familiar surroundings; then a feeling of limitation made it yearn for the
enlargement and invigoration of change. And yet his thoroughly sensuous
intelligence, always desiring actual vision and the bodily pre- sence of
things, clung close to the familiar, in so far that deep down in his heart
lived all experiences and feelings; only the separate and peculiar images of
things could not but blur and fade fast from that busily mirroring soul: to
prevent their total disappearance their colours must be refreshed.  But
Wolfgang had part in the characteristics of his father also, from whom came his
serious fixedness of will and firm persistence in doing what seemed to him
right to be done; his serene consciousness of worth, his keen sense of duty.
