The young mother poured out all her most fervent love on the beautiful child,
sadly weak at first from a very painful birth, but soon getting on capitally,
to the great joy of his parents, who felt in him a bond of nearer union. A year
and three months later the family wealth was increased by the birth of a little
daughter, named Cornelia, after Grandmother Goethe. This little sister of
Wolfgang had fine gifts, deep seriousness, penetrating intellect, a loving
susceptible soul, and between brother and sister grew a tender union, which, in
the years spent together under the strict schoolmastership of their father, was
drawn closer and closer. The children often went to the house of their
grandparents Textor, where the fine garden was a real blessing to them, or to
the new home of their mother's younger sister, Johanna Maria, married since the
end of 1751 to the druggist Melber. At no other houses were they familiar
visitors. With the half-brother of their father, Alderman Hermann Jakob Goethe,
there was no very animated intercourse: still he was godfather at the
christening of Wolfgang's young brother, November 27, 1752. In the same year
the master-shoemakers were excited almost to in- surrection at thought of the
admission to their rank of the already-mentioned journeyman, Christof Justus
Goethe; the refractory masters were put under arrest, and Christof Justus was
at last successful in January 1753.  For that younger brother little Wolfgang
cared far less than for his sister. With her he used to play up and down
through the house, now in the wide spaces of the great entrance- hall, now in
the apartment curiously latticed from street and hall, called Gertims, and now
in grandmother's sitting-room overlooking the courtyard.  This kind
grandmother, now growing daily weaker, pre- pared a great delight for the boy
in a puppet-show of David and Goliath, which she caused to be exhibited to the
children on Christmas Eve, 1753. It was like a blessing at farewell from the
good old woman, now in her eighty-sixth year. Some three months later she died
suddenly when going to bed.  Only the prospect of rebuilding had enabled Rath
Goethe to put up with the gloom, the odd corners, the irregularity of his
house; there was not even room enough in it, the com- panion house being let to
a law-student named Clauer, son of a former Keeper of the Town Archives. The
children had generally been kept in the family sitting-rooms, during summer
weather they were allowed to stay in the Garden-Room on the second story, above
the courtyard. It was a great delight to Wolfgang to look from this room across
the town gardens and walls into the distance of the level country spreading
down the Main towards Hochst, to watch from these western windows the ever new
glory of the sunsets; yet the delight was mixed with loneliness and yearning at
sight of the merry play, the free coming and going of children, or the
laughing, talking groups of older people in the gardens from which he was shut
out. However, his father had a vineyard near the Friedberger- thor, to which he
sometimes permitted his son to accompany him; there, at about his sixth year,
the boy was present at the joyous ingathering of the grapes. The design of the
rebuild- ing was now carefully thought over, and all distant preparations for
it were made, but there could be no real beginning until after the birth of a
child expected in September (1754).  Wolfgang's father, who observed his easy
grasp of knowledge with great joy, put him early in harness, and tried even to
make play-hours bring fresh store of knowledge.
