Thus his mother was the first educator of the inventive, plastic poet-power
which dwelt within him.  And the popular chap-books too, on unsized paper,
which he could get for a few kreutzers at the bookstalls near the cathedral,
had even at that early time a fructifying effect on his busy imagination.
There was in the Frankfurt blood a great delight in the old traditional
festivities which ushered in the half-yearly fairs, and in the picturesque
various activity of the fairs themselves.  Even grave Councillor Goethe, to
whom from his youth these had been familiar splendours, could not restrain the
children from a full enjoyment of them, and this especially because Grandfather
Textor, as Chief Magistrate, had always to take a distinguished part in them.
Goethe, only a few years before his death, recalled with delight how he and his
sister gave money, and bread-and-butter, and coloured eggs, to the masked Three
Kings at the Star-singing, to the Shrove Tuesday singers, and to those who
announced the coming of the swallows; and he thought, too, of the autumnal
harvest festival, which, at a later time, was merely a religious ceremony. Of
delightful festivals without the town, in which the children took part from a
very early age, he names the Shepherd Festival at the Grind- brunnen, and the
so-called Cow-dance on Pentecost Tuesday at the Pfingstweide, which last was
forbidden in 1758.  On the 6th of March 1755, six months after the birth of his
second daughter, Rath Goethe handed in to the Town Council a plan of his
proposed rebuilding; a week later he gave notice that, in order to build
according to this plan, he would throw down and build afresh that companion
house to the north which has been mentioned before. There was some hesita- tion
about permitting this portion of the building, which would thus be completely
new, to have, like the old main-house, a projecting second story, so the final
decision of the Council was not made known till the 25th of April. Immediately
the neighbour house was thrown down, and the foundation of the new building
laid in the old cellar. The corner-stone was placed by little Wolfgang, clad as
a mason, a trowel in his hand, the master stone-mason by his side directing.
Props were put against the main house, the gable wall on the ground floor was
to be renewed, part of the old roof was taken off.  The building gave all kinds
of fun to the children. But since, in spite of all defensive erections, the
rain would come through the breach in the roof until even the beds were
drenched, it was necessary to send the children to live elsewhere, with their
grandparents, or with cheery Aunt Johanna, and for lessons they must go to
school. This absence from home meant, especially to the boy, greater freedom,
and he used it to make a wider survey of the city.  First, their father's large
collection of books was divided between his study on the second story and a
room on the third story; then the pictures, in dark frames striped with gold,
were hung in a precise order in the room with three windows occupying the
middle place on the second story; the views from Rome, the geographical sheets,
etc, found a place on the walls of corridors and passages; art objects of many
kinds—chief among which were those from Venice, the splendid specimens of
glass-work, the model of a gondola, the bronzes, and the weapons—were, with
almost painful carefulness, placed on the shelves intended for them The
ingathering of the grapes was hardly over when the world was horror-stricken by
tidings of the mighty earthquake, during which, on the ist of November 1755, a
great part of Lisbon was swallowed, and a vast tract of land and sea rocked to
and fro. All the pulpits zealously improved the terrible occasion into a
judgment of God on a world lying in wicked- ness. Each tale of the desolation
of Lisbon was followed by another more terrible, and the apprehension plain in
all around affected the intelligent boy; but it was soon driven away by his
healthy tone of feeling, and by the conception of a benevolent Deity, deep
implanted within, and strengthened byiis mother's care.  They were taught to go
to church regularly, to know the Lutheran Catechism. But ecclesiastical
conceptions did not cleave to Goethe's soul; to him they were merely acquired
formulas, of which he made such use as one makes of any traditional theories;
within him lived the idea of an all- gracious and all-wise Creator and
Preserver of the world, to whom reverence must draw nigh by a way purer and
more spiritual than any words; an indication is the thank-offering, charmingly
described by Goethe himself, offered as the first morning sunshine fell across
his chamber.  The first Christmas in the new house was near when the youngest
little daughter, only fifteen months old, died (1755).  However the stricken
parents might sorrow, the children's Christmas should not lack its brightness;
the puppet-show, first given by their grandmother, and produced under the
direction of their mother two years before, was repeated now in a way suitable
to their more advanced age, in a company of others as old as themselves. The
audience sat in Wolf- gang's room; the stage filled the doorway of the
adjoining room. This representation interested the boy so much, that he did not
rest until he had penetrated the mystery. He soon found where the little
figures of the puppet-show were kept, and then persuaded his mother to give
them over to him, with the book of words and the theatre. In the puppet-show
story of Wilhelm Master's Lehrjahre, most of the details, even as to the
composition of scenes and acts, are a free transfer from Goethe's own boy-life.
These experiences of a childish theatre, which found more favour with his
mother than with his father, had their value in training his dramatic faculty.
But parallel to them, a regular schooling ran its accustomed course; for his
father insisted on the fastest possible acquisition of the parts of education
dependent on memory alone, and tried constantly to add to Wolfgang's knowledge
even in his play-hours. An earnest desire to know all about the various lands
of the earth and their peoples was encouraged in every way.
