Rath Goethe's life was very happy just then. In March 1757 had been born a
little daughter whose beauty and sweetness won Wolfgang completely. The two
elder children grew and thrived, though Cornelia was somewhat tried by her
father's teaching mania. By this time the Councillor had begun Italian with his
daughter, that beloved language in which he had, with the aid of an Italian
master of languages, even written the earlier portions of an account of his
travels.  Wolfgang had to commit to memory his Cellarius in the room where,
under their father's tutorship, his sister was get- ting her first Italian
lessons: it must have been winter, else the boy could have stayed in his
chamber next the roof. As he used soon to know the portion of Cellarius
appointed, he had time to listen over the top of his book, and very quickly
obtained some grasp of Italian, yet he made no very extended advance, though he
used with his sister to learn the tasks set her.  Their mother was a model of a
bright, busy, loyal Ger- man wife and matron; she shared with heartfelt
sympathy the joys and sorrows of each of her family circle; still there was
special delight and pride in the glance which rested on her Wolfgang who was
growing up so well. She was already rather intimate with the devout Susanna
Katharina von Klettenberg, who however, had not yet joined the Moravian
community. Fraiilein Klettenberg was niece of the wife of Frau Goethe's
great-uncle, Major and Town-Commandant Johann Nicolaus Textor. To the cheery
natural tone of feeling of Goethe's mother, the pietistic tendency was some-
thing quite alien, though she had been habituated to its note in the hymn
phraseology of the day. We give here her contribution to a Fraiilein von
Bellersheim's Album, on the plan of which Bogatzky's Golden Treasury of the
Children of God was drawn up. Beside Frau Goethe, other people be- longing to
the Klettenberg circle have made entries, mostly in the years 1752-1754.
Spring 1758 saw the internal arrangements of the house at last complete. On May
1 the Councillor had various things which were only in his way publicly sold,
among them some woodwork, the old Gerams, three house-clocks, a violin, an
ebony German flute—these musical instruments were probably left by his father—a
number of law-books, of books on practice, and historical books.  But
instruction in German was not forgotten. It was a delight to his father to see
Wolfgang read the most instructive poets of his library, though to himself
their rhymes had not the charm of the Italian. The absence of rhyme in
Klopstock's Messias made that poem a torture to him. How the Bavarian Agent
Schneider smuggled in this poem j how the children revelled in it, particularly
in the Dream of Portia, even more in the gruesome dialogue between Satan and
Adramelech; how their recital of this dialogue was near causing a dreadful
accident; and how after this a stricter veto than ever banished the offending
Messias, is generally known from Goethe's own narrative.  The winter evenings
were usefully spent Rath Goethe disapproved of cards and other round games; as
entertain- ment he had an instructive book read aloud; and he saw that it was
read to the end, however tedious the children found it, for his maxim was
"Always finish what you have begun." The serious man carried out with
unwavering decision everything which seemed to him beneficial. Thus he himself
gave the children lessons in dancing, to which he would play some air on a
flute douce in three-quarter time.  But however his many whims and hobbies
plagued them, the children had a reverential attachment for one so earnestly
intent on their welfare. Their fullest love and desire indeed was towards their
young mother, who laughed and rejoiced with them, taking life so cheerily. What
a charm her presence breathes in Hermann und Dorothea; where too the Host of
the Golden Lion has some touches of Councillor Goethe.  Intimate as the Goethes
were with so many well-to-do families, the children had no lack of
companionship of equal age. Here Wolfgang was prominent, his great talents, the
skill inherited from his mother to delight willing listeners with exciting
stories, and a certain air of distinction, gave him mastery even over boys
older than himself. "We were always the lackeys," said the elder Moors, the
neighbour and friend of Wolfgang whom we already know, in after years to the
Frau Rath.
