Another time, it is related, he called on the stars propitious to him for their
aid, adding a little later that what sufficed for other people would not
suffice for him. We must picture the boy in the Sunday suit described by Goethe
him- self, with hair curled and powdered, with locks standing out well from his
head, hat under arm, sword at side, a long silken ribbon running through the
bow at its hilt, great silver buckles on his shoes, fine cotton stockings,
black serge breeches and some pretty coat and waistcoat. We would not guarantee
that these last were the coat of green barracan with gold facings and the
waistcoat of gold brocade described in the child's tale The New Paris. He does
not himself mention the hair bag which he wore according to the not very
reliable account of Bettina von Arnim. Bettina sends him on visits to
acquaintances in dress-coat, silk stockings and shoes, only when at home
wearing surtout, long trousers, and boots.  All clothes were made at home; his
father would not take a man-servant who did not understand tailoring.  On
Sunday afternoons Wolfgang paid visits to his young friends, with whom he had
many other meetings too, both for schooling and for play. Among them, we know,
were the two neighbour boys Moors; the second son of Olenschlager, born
1751,—his elder brother was deaf and dumb;—and a boy called Hiisgen, four years
older than Wolfgang. Also with Karl Allesina von Schweitzer, the son of a rich
trader, he seems to have been by this time acquainted, and indeed with many
children of the middle class. That Wolfgang could not conceal a certain pride
in his grandfather's high dignity excited the ill-will of many boys, and they
vented it on him in various ways. The worst was when one of the malicious
fellows taunted his father to him with being the natural son of a man of high
rank. How the thought of this excited him is told at length by himself; in his
childish fantastic brain he felt pleased by it, not understanding the shame of
such a birth.  The festivities of New Year's Day, 1759, had been cheerily
celebrated. At noon on January 2d, 7000 French soldiers entered Frankfurt,
under a plea of a march through, to which only one battalion at a time was
entitled. They overpowered first the Guard at the Affcnthor in Sachsen- hausen,
then Major and Town-Commandant Textor, in pre- sence of the Constable Guard at
the Bornheim Gate, then the Guard itself; finally the main Guard within the
town.  Thus by concerted treachery the hereditary enemy of the Imperial city
(though now her Emperor's ally), entered into possession for the first time.
The severe burden of quartering soldiers fell on the citizens. Councillor
Goethe had to give up his ground floor, so handsome, the earliest furnished
part of the house, to King's Lieutenant Thorane, from Mouans, near Grasse in
Provence. Personally this man was kind- hearted, highly cultivated, a lover of
art; but as an officer his action was based on the theory, that citizens are to
receive with contented mind any insults which it may please officers their
lords to inflict. And the Frankfurt Town Council was not strong enough to
protect the rights of the people. The betrayed city was treated as if it had
been acquired by con- quest. Councillor Goethe, a good Frankfurter, who cursed
the French and those who let them in, was galled by constant reminder of the
fact that he was no longer master in his own house. With his troubled spirit,
he could not continue to give to the teaching and culture of his Wolfgang the
loving careful- ness of earlier years.  The Greek is still very faulty. The
stirring doings at home and the excited military liveliness of the city were a
great delight to the bright boy; his regret that these enemies of Frederick
were masters of Frank- furt forgot itself in careless light-heartedness the
more easily as he gained greater freedom thereby. His mother tried to
accommodate herself to these changed circumstances, which had their extreme
unpleasantness for her too—circumstances, the blame of which was laid by so
many, including her husband, on the shoulders of her father—and she strove
after her fashion to mould them into something tolerable. From Diene, the
interpreter lodged in the house, she got lessons in the to her as yet unknown
language of the unwelcome but so cheerful and courteous guests. Nor did her boy
let slip the opportunity of improving his French. The occupation of his native
city was a new agency indeed in his whole culture, as is always the knowledge
of a foreign people, especially one so civilised as the French. Alas, however,
the French garrison, in which were many Germans, introduced the greatest
depravity among all classes. Though Wolfgang had been brought up by his father
in delicate purity, and though the proud serious- ness which scares away
inconvenient jesting and unseemliness had breathed its power upon him, there
were yet traces of the light life now surrounding him left when it had passed
away.
