As for Wolfgang's younger friends, he was specially intimate with Riese and
with Dr. Horn; the latter, who had now lost all hope of winning his Leipzig
sweetheart, was the same cheery companion that he had been in former days, not
being dispirited even by the smallness of his professional gains.  Riese, who
had become Secretary to the Vestry Board, was very fond of meeting Wolfgang's
ardent assertions with cold doubts and considerations, on which ensued lively
discussions.  Crespel too was back in Frankfurt; he had come in the course of
the previous year, and had obtained a place as supernumerary (Accessist) in the
Post Office. His quaint humour and honest kindliness were a real gain to the
little circle of friends. These four—Goethe, Horn, Crespel, and Riese—used to
play chess on a great double board which belonged to Riese. Crespel was a great
lover of music and a master of the Viola d'amour. Goethe practised diligently
on the violoncello, probably sometimes taking parts with others.  To Salzmann,
the witness of his disturbed Strassburg days, he writes very soon after his
return to Frankfurt:—" What I pro- duce (tnache) is nothing. So much the worse
1 As usual more scheming than performing. And so not much will ever come of
me." He asks Salzmann to procure him from Silber- mann a sketch of the
ground-plan of the cathedral, and to ask, in passing, whether one could procure
a copy of the great original design, and in what way.1 Perhaps we may ascribe
to this period the first sketch of the essay which he dedicated to the founder
of the cathedral (p. 160). On the 21st of September (1771) we find him writing
to a friend then living in sight of the cathedral. This great masterpiece of
German architecture speaks with more emphasis than he can, that a great
intelli- gence differs from a small one mainly in that its work is self-
sufficient, seeming to have been co-existent from eternity with its idea,
without regard to what others may have done.  his letter was very soon followed
by one with which Wolfgang enclosed passages from the supposed original Temora
of Ossian, with literal German translations. He again begs Herder to send the
Essay on Shakespeare for the festival.  "The first health drunk after that of
the Will of all Wills shall be yours," he goes on; "I have already preached
together a capital public for the Warwickshire man, and I am translating
passages from Ossian, that him too I may proclaim out of the full heart . . .
Apostle or Philistine! I remain towards you what I have been."2 Wolfgang's
speech at the festival, which has been preserved," betrays Herder's influence
even in the style, though that is more bright and free than Herder's. The Greek
drama, it says, set before the people great isolated acts from the lives of
their fathers in the clear simplicity of perfect- ness, roused large undivided
emotions in their souls, for it was itself complete and great. 
