It is true that he had a sharp eye for all weaknesses; but he had also a
natural good taste, which had been perfected by culture. If he censured what
was bad, it was always his impulse to point to what was better; he delighted in
furthering the development of real genius: in fact, so far from being a
steadfast Denier, he himself was irresistibly impelled to activity in various
fields: poetry, art, science, practical affairs. All his life he remained in a
situa- tion beneath his deservings; the feeling of wrong rankled within him;
and this, alas! together with misfortune in his family, brought out the gall
which lay in his character. But at bottom he was always a noble man. Beneath
his picture should be written the words which he wrote late in life to his
daughter (then fifteen):—" Our little bit of a good name is all that is left
us; and if I had lost that, I could never have endured the cruel strokes which
Fate has dealt me." Now when Herder, gloomy in Biickeburg, treated our Goethe
with almost scornful bitterness, at last relapsing into galling silence, it was
special good fortune to meet this keen critic, who stimulated and renewed the
lad's ardour by gladly recognising his genius, and by cleaving to him with
warm- hearted good-will. True, Merck had already become a sufferer from
physical ailment, and was dispirited about many things, particularly that
unsatisfactory situation. But a beneficial impetus was given to him just then,
when Deinet of Frankfurt, who had married the widow of the bookseller
Eichenberg, put in his hands the management of the Frankfurter gelehrte
Anzeigen1—just such work as he desired. The new Review it was that had brought
him to Frankfurt. He there visited J. G. Schlosser, whom he reckoned on as one
of his chief fellow-workers. At Schlosser's house he seems to have met Goethe,
who, towards the close of 1771, writes to Herder:— "Some time ago I had a rich
evening in Merck's company.  In his usual submissive way, he begs the reverend
priest, while caring for the altar, not to forget the acolyte race, whose
fantasy goes forth in wild yearning for the chasuble, but whose strength, alas!
setting more before it than it is able for, too often finds its non plus ultra
in mere Adjunctus and sacristan offices.1 In a letter of the 3d of February
1772 he thanks Salz- mann for the trouble he had taken about Gotz; Salzmann had
been much pleased with it, and had written a letter of careful criticism. There
is a period of pupilage, replies Goethe, which we cannot overleap; a remark
which reminds us of what we have just heard him say to Herder. Salzmann having
in- quired about the Frankfurtergelehrte Anzeigen, Goethe observes that no
Review will surpass it in honesty and independence of feeling and thinking; the
staff of writers for it is considerable, and daily increasing; he is not
himself connected with it, other- wise than that he knows and esteems the
director (Merck), and that an important co-operator in it (Schlosser) is a
particular friend.
