 I felt in it the beloved spirit of our old Germans; and little George, begging
 for a white steed and armour, is my George.  Then we went on the water" (at a
 lonely residence in the forest), " but the weather was bad. Goethe is crammed
 with songs." She sends Herder a poem which Goethe made one morning on a lonely
 walk in the fir wood; another excellent one, about a hut built in the ruins of
 an ancient temple, she will ask him for should he come again. To this lady and
 her sister he gave a moving account of his Leipzig love; Friederike he did not
 mention, hers was too sacred a memory.  Merck and Goethe about Easter (19th
 April 1772) came together to Frankfurt, but passed on immediately to Homburg.
 "The Landgraf and the Landgrdfin have loaded us with kindness," Merck writes
 to his wife. "I have had the honour of more than an hour's conversation with
 his Highness. They sent one of the court carriages to bring us to the forest,
 where we found a fairy-land." Their visit was more particularly intended for a
 Maid of Honour, Luise von Ziegler, who had, for a short time back, been the
 most intimate friend of Herder's betrothed; Merck had sung her as " Lila."
 Caroline writes of her:—" She is a sweet visionary maiden; has had her grave
 made in her garden; she has a throne in her garden; her pleasures are her
 arbours and roses in summer, and her little lamb, which eats and drinks with
 her. . . . Her life in Homburg is rather lonely, and that makes her heart so
 op- Tessed and full that she regularly clings to any good soul she comes
 across." Beside the reason assigned here there was unhappy love in the case.
 She had at that time with her, on a visit, her friend Fraulein von Roussillon,
 Maid of Honour (Hofdame) to the Duchess of Pfalz-Zweibriicken. Merck was
 especially intimate with Fraulein Roussillon; he used to accompany her on
 walks; tried to divert and cheer her suffering and melancholy; it may have
 been he who gave her the name " Urania." When Merck, with Goethe by his side,
 met these two ladies, Urania received him with warm kisses and embraces, and
 Lila fell on his breast; to the young Frank- furt lawyer each gave a cordial
 hand. He too on a walk one day ventured to beg from them the rapture of a
 kiss.  "I am beginning to be regularly in love with Goethe. Here is a human
 being who touches my heart as very few have ever done." Merck had gone to
 Frankfurt on Frau von Laroche's account; she Goethe and himself were to travel
 to Darmstadt together. He writes to his wife that the Laroche had brought her
 eldest daughter Max, and that both ladies are to be their guests, so she
 (Merck's wife) is to procure a bed for Goethe and himself in the big room at
 the house of Professor Jaup. "Frau von Laroche is a lady of the grand world,
 of very distinguished manners; she speaks French better than German, and her
 intellect passes over with astonishing light- ness from the most solid
 conversation to the most everyday attentions of society. She assumes when she
 will the semblance of indifference, she puts it off when she will. She is a
 strong personality, and I know from experience that it is not a good thing to
 fall out with such. At least she is quite different in social intercourse from
 what she is in her letters. She talks infinitely better than she writes."
 Goethe too was not attracted by the fine court lady, in whom he, to his
 surprise, saw the author of the Geschichte des Frduleins von Sternheim; the
 French social tone to which her daughter also had been trained was distasteful
 to the poet of Gb'tz, who loved to speak from the full heart. So Goethe did
 not go with them to Darmstadt after all. When Herder's betrothed writes that
 Goethe rages like a lion against Frau von Laroche, she probably borrows the
 expression from Merck, who liked the lady less and less the more he saw of
 her. In Caroline's description of the Laroche we must probably allow for a
 certain amount of pique at having to play an unimportant part beside the new
 guest, but there is no doubt that the main outlines are correct "A presence,
 how different from the simple noble Sternheim!" Caroline writes. "A fine
 dainty lady, a court dame, a woman of the world, with a thousand little
 adornments, even though she wear no lace; a woman full of wit, full of very
 delicate intelligence.
