Lila too had arrived at this time.  Once Goethe, at Merck's house, read to Lila
and Caroline the touching story of Le Fevre, in Tristram Shandy. Caroline again
felt that she was in the presence of an extremely good man, one worthy of her
Lila; only, to win her he must be of the nobility. But no one could be further
from any intention of tying his heart than Goethe, at that time altogether
intent as he was on the perfecting of mind and spirit True he had succeeded in
disciplining his soul to the patient working out of a great poem, and might
hope to find continually henceforth firm footing; still he knew that he was
only in the beginning of his growth, that before he could stand alone and erect
he needed the vivifying and strengthening of a rich experience.  In Frankfurt
Schlosser was always near, but yet more import- ant was the alliance with
Merck, who had given Goto the praise it merited when Herder had remained
obstinately silent Gladly would Goethe have prolonged the time to be spent in
Darmstadt, where he found so much sympathy; but Councillor Goethe pressed that
his son should go to Wetzlar as he and many others—Crespel being one—had done,
to gain as prac- titioner in the Reichskamtnergericht more exact knowledge of
law procedure. However little Wetzlar, narrow, dull, already so long plagued
with an Imperial Visitation-Commission, might have to attract, Wolfgang would
not oppose in this matter the wishes of his father, who left him so free in
other ways; and so, confiding after all in his destiny, he turned his steps
north- wards.  The life of the young lawyers who came together in Wetzlar from
every district in Germany was far from being dry and dull, after all. At the
largely attended table d'hdte of the inn Zum Kronprinzen was a mock Table
Round, an Order of Knights instituted—so the title said—for the Protection of
the Right and the Delivery of Oppressed Youth. This order had been founded by
von Goue' of Hildesheim, a member of the Bruns- wick Embassy, six years
Goethe's senior. Goethe too joined this fantastic Bund; it even amused him for
some time to take a share in ordering the ceremonial, that the parody might not
lack all semblance of the real. He was himself named "Gbtz von Berlichingen der
Redliche;" for people had heard of his play.  The Goue' above mentioned, who
was entitled "Castellan von Coucy," held himself a great genius—had he not
already four dramas in print? Another poet whom Goethe met at the Table Round
was the Gotha Secretary of Legation, Friedrich Wilhelm Gotter,—born 1746,—who
had especially formed himself on French literature; was fond of translating
plays from the French; and sometimes, too, ventured on little original pieces
with some skill, if with no great power. The two poets found a bond of union in
their like activities in different channels. Gotter had two years ago been
joint- editor with Boie of the first year's issue of the Gottinger
Musenalmanach, in which he still took some share; and it was no secret that
Goethe was a contributor to that new Frankfurter gelehrte Anzeigen, which had
made such a stir.  Another valued friend of Wolfgang's was his equal in age,
von Kielmansegge of Mecklenburg, who had come to Wetzlar to look after a
law-suit. 
