"He has a great deal of talent, is a true genius and a man of charac- ter;
possesses an extraordinarily vivid imagination, thus speaks mostly in images
and similes. He is used to say that he always expresses himself unexactly,
never can exactly; adding that when he is older he hopes to be able to think
and say the thoughts themselves as they should be. He is passionate in all his
emotions; exercises, however, often great control over himself. His way of
thinking is noble; being very free from prejudices, he acts as is pleasing to
him, without inquiring whether he pleases others, whether it is the fashion,
whether convention allows it. He hates any constraint. He loves children, and
never wearies of their company. He is bizarre, and there are things in his
behaviour, his outward man, which might repel some; but with children, with
women, and indeed many besides, he is high in favour. Woman he holds in high
reverence. In prinupiis he is not yet stablished,—is as yet but striving after
a phil- osophy. To add something on this subject—he holds Rousseau high, though
no blind adorer. He is not what is called orthodox; still this is not from
pride, or caprice, or desire to play a part. And on certain great subjects he
will open his mind only to a few; would fain not disturb others in their
tranquil beliefs. Indeed he hates Sctptictemum; seeks truth and conviction on
certain great subjects; thinks, too, that he is already convinced as to the
weightiest: so far however as I have observed is not as yet. He goes neither to
church nor to the Lord's Supper, and rarely prays; for, he says, 'I am not
hypocrite enough for that.' At times he is tranquil as to certain matters, at
times anything but tranquil.  He describes her delicate physique, her gentle
soul; she was sprightly and lively, of quick conception and great pre- sence of
mind. With her chat, her merry notions, her humour, she made everybody feel
happy; then she was virtuous, pious, industrious, teachable, and willing to
undergo any womanly toils. The young Secretary of Legation was now her accepted
lover. When, in March 1771, her mother, the pattern of a good housewife, died,
all the cares of the household fell on the shoulders of Charlotte; the eldest
daughter, Caroline Wilhel- mine, seems to have been less capable. Kestner
writes:— "All Goethe's attention was at once fixed on Lottchen. She is still
young; though no regular beauty she has a very pleasing, attractive, con-
formation of features; her glance is like a cheery morning in spring;
especially was it so that day, for she loves dancing j she was in good spirits;
her dress was quite unelaborate. He noticed in her a feeling for the beauty of
Nature, and an unforced wit—rather humour than wit He did not know that she was
no longer free; I came a couple of hours later, and it is never our wont to
manifest, in public resort, any relation closer than friendship. He was
extravagantly merry that day; so he is often, and at other times melancholy.
Lottchen made a complete conquest, the easier because she did not try any such
thing, but simply gave herself to the enjoyment of the evening. Next day, of
course, Goethe must call to inquire after Lottchen's health. Hitherto he had
known her as a merry girl, who liked dancing and pleasures undisturbed by care;
now he learned to know her on that side where her strength is displayed—on the
side of her housewifely activity." At first sight Goethe was thus captivated by
the fresh natural- ness of the bright maiden, and she, too, felt much attracted
towards the new charming visitor to her sphere. And when he saw her in the
midst of the numerous flock of her brothers and sisters, ordering and disposing
like a most careful and loving mother, his emotion was deepened; must not the
famous scene where Werther sees Lotte first, be, like so much else in the
novel, a transfer from reality? There was, indeed, in her presence, a magnetism
which kept him constandy at her side, though he now knew her to be engaged to
Kestner, and never of course thought of striving to win her from his friend.
