Spinoza formed a peculiar bond of union. In the arbour at the hunting-seat
Castle Bensberg Jacobi spoke to his new friend never-to-be-forgotten words
concerning the great lonely thinker, penetrating to the heart of his
philosophy; above all, expressing his conviction that the Spinoza condemned by
men as a denier of God has made it clear that Nature is Divine, is God.
Jacobi's conviction that Faith must make good the inadequacy of human reason
hardly came to be spoken of at this time, and would have the less power to
disunite because of Goethe's high reverence before all genuine religious
belief.  After the mild, mystical Lavater and the rude hard rational- ist
Basedow, the clear philosophic conspectus of one who had so pressed to the
centre of Spinoza's teaching could not but work on Goethe with highly
stimulating effect, and he would feel the more deeply the significance of such
a friend.  But first in ancient Koln the union was to receive its high- est
consecration. On the morning of the 24th of July a carriage bore the two
Jacobis and Heinse to the cathedral city, where they alighted in the inn Zum
heiligen Geist, which looked out at the back on the Rhine hard by. To the
little band who passed through its streets in the intoxication of friendship
the gloomy city appeared very bright The un- finished cathedral seemed to
proclaim with mighty voice the measure of achievement to which the daring human
spirit may attain. An even more affecting spectacle was a family picture by
Lebrun in the house of Jabach, now occupied by a single servant alone. Everard
Jabach, the rich merchant, the patron of art, the patrician, had long passed
away and the blooming family which had surrounded him, and the echoing house
was left untenanted; yet there he stood, with wife and children, and gazed from
the living picture. The spirit of Jabach seemed to speak to the poet's soul,
exhorting him to gather to- gether his forces and put them to their fullest
use; he could not help giving his intense agitation words, even in the silent
presence which had so stirred him, a presence which followed him for many days.
At midnight, after they had all separated for sleep, Goethe once again sought
Jacobi in his room; they fell on each other's neck, and Jacobi "wept sacred
tears on his breast"1 And in high spiritual elevation, they promised each to
stretch his utmost strength to the most effectual working, that those best
things of which God and Nature had made them capable might be accomplished.  On
the 25th of July Goethe rejoined Lavater at Ems.  With Basedow they on the
following day went to see Mama Sophie, and the opponent of the Trinity, as was
his wont, honoured the good wine too much. On the 27th Lavater left. This
endlessly good and energetic man was another friend whom Goethe now believed
inseparably grappled.  Goethe had promised to go over the Physiognomische Frag-
mente in manuscript, to change, to omit, to add, as seemed good to him. On
Lavater's return journey he again stopped at the Goethes' house; how cordial
were his relations with Goethe's parents is proved by their letters to the
"dearest best son," the "dearest friend," the "noble guest, whom it was so easy
to please."
