His new ardent friendship and the manifold impressions of travel had infused
fresh life into him. Jacobi and he wrote mutual encouragement to be up and
doing, and took pleasure in each other's productions. Jacobi having urged him
to visit Johanna Fahlmer again, the old intimacy with her was now resumed. Anna
Sybilla Munch probably was one of those to whom he gave a copy of Clavigo, her
command having been at least the external occasion of the poem. But his four
weeks' absence (July 15-August 13, 1774) had chilled their alliance, and even
the more would it dwindle, mere graceful fooling that it was at its best,
beside his glowing friendship for Jacobi, and the sudden and mighty start of
his genius. On the 2 7 th of August he spent a happy day with Merck in Langen.
(Merck has been—in vain—offering Goethe's Puppenspiel to Nicolai.) The old
friend had contented himself in his position as he best could, though he had
not given up thought of seek- ing elsewhere—in Berlin if possible—a suitable
appointment The unrest and unhappiness of Max Brentano continued to fill Goethe
with sorrow,3 especially because she under- stood not why he held back from her
society. In the extra- ordinary creative energy of this time the voices of
dissent roused by his Clavigo had no power to disquiet. To Jacobi, mich mit der
Warme die ich erregte. In der Verwirrung dtuhle ich ihm A them eintublasen."
The second of the three special copies first received found its way, on the 2
2d of September, to Thalehrenbreitstein.  Mama Sophie was, when she had read
it, to send it to Jacobi and to let the author know what she thought of the
second part, as she had already criticised the first in manuscript.2 There is a
rumour that she was angry with him for inweaving her daughter Max in the book;
but such an inweaving is totally out of question. Knowing Jacobi's fine moral
feeling, Goethe was extremely anxious about his judgment. Not to disturb him in
forming it, Goethe would for a time neither write to him nor send him
anything.3 He had indeed to wait long in uncertainty, for Jacobi did not get
the book until the middle of October, and not until the 21st, having read it
thrice, did he write to describe its powerful effect. To the poet's deep-felt
joy, he spoke thus—" Thy heart, thy heart, is everything to me. Thy heart it is
by which thou art enlight- ened, strengthened, established. I know that this is
so, for I too hear the voice, the voice of the only begotten Son of God, the
Mediator between the Father and us. My soul is too full." Klopstock had just
been with the Gottingen poets, and tried to bind them yet closer to himself. In
Gottingen he had spoken "amazingly" (erstaunlich) for Goethe, had praised
Clavigo; Werther was not yet issued to the trade. Klopstock could not fail to
see how far Goethe exceeded all those poets in fire and genius; and so with
Goethe he condescended somewhat from his peculiar prophetic elevation. He is "a
noble great man, on whom the peace of God rests," accord- ing to a letter of
Goethe a month later.1 The scenes of Faust, read aloud by the poet with all the
fire of his soul, were what most impressed Klopstock. He expressed himself in
detail on skating, on the best kind of skates—" Schrittschuh" not "Schlitischuh
" must the winged cothurnus be in future named.  Ecclesiastical Councillor
{Kirchcnratti) Bockmann, through whose agency the Markgraf had invited
Klopstock, now came from Karlsruhe to fetch the honoured guest With Bockmann
also Goethe found himself easily on the friendliest terms; lending him Satyros,
and begging his kind offices in getting proper skates made. Goethe did not
allow himself to be deprived by Bockmann's presence of the pleasure of accom-
panying his distinguished visitor part of the way, perhaps to Mannheim.
Returning in the post-carriage to Frankfurt on the 10th of October his excess
of life overflowed in the poem An Schwager Kronos?  On Oct. 15th he had a visit
from Boie, who, returning from Holland, had been with Jacobi and Mama Sophie on
his way.  Boie was extremely delighted with the day that he spent undis-
turbedly alone with Goethe, whose heart was "as noble and great as his mind." 
