Yes, do not refuse ; help your friend to bear with his troubles, 
his infirmity. I have also greatly improved my pianoforte playing. I hope this journey may also turn to your 
advantage ; afterwards you will always remain with me. I 
have duly received all your letters, and although I have 
answered only a few, you have been always in my mind;
and my heart, as always, beats tenderly for you. Please 
keep as a great secret what I have told you about my hearing; trust no one, whoever it may be, with it. 

Do write frequently; your letters, however short they 
may be, console me, do me good. I expect soon to get another one from you, my dear friend. Don't lend out my 
Quartet any more, because I have made many changes in 
it. I have only just learnt how to write quartets properly, 
as you will see when you receive them. 

Now, my dear good friend, farewell ! If perchance you believe that I can show you any kindness here, I need not, of 
course, remind you to address yourself first to your faithful, truly loving, L. v. Beethoven.

Just a few^ words today, and indeed in pencil — with thine 
— only till tomorrow is my room definitely engaged; what 
an unworthy waste of time in such matters — why this deep 
sorrow where necessity speaks ! Can our love endure otherwise than through sacrifices, through restraint in longing? 
Canst thou help not being wholly mine, can I, not being 
wholly thine? Oh! gaze at nature in all its beauty, and 
calmly accept the inevitable — love demands everything, and 
rightly so. Thus is it for me with thee, for thee with me, 
only thou so easily forgettest that I must live for myself 
and for thee — were we wholly united thou wouldst feel this 
painful fact as little as I should — my journey was terrible. 
I arrived here only yesterday morning at four o'clock, and 
as they were short of horses the mail-coach selected another route — but what an awful road! At the last stage 
but one I was warned against traveling by night; they 
frightened me with a wood, but that only spurred me on — 
and I was wrong, the coach must needs break down, the
road being dreadful, a swamp, a mere country road; with- 
out the postillions I had with me I should have stuck on the 
way. Esterhazi, by the ordinary road, met with the same 
fate with eight horses as I with four — yet it gave me some 
pleasure, as successfully overcoming any difficulty always 
does. Now for a quick change from without to within — we 
shall probably soon see each other, besides, today I cannot 
tell thee what has been passing through my mind during the 
past few days concerning my life — were our hearts closely 
united I should not do things of this kind. My heart is full 
of many things I have to say to thee — ah, there are moments in which I feel that speech is powerless ! Cheer up — 
remain my true, my only treasure, my all ! as I to thee. 
The gods must send the rest — what for us must be and 
ought to be. 

Thou sufferest, thou my dearest love ! I have just found 
out that the letters must be posted very early Mondays, 
Thursdays — the only days when the post goes from here to 
K. Thou sufferest — ah, where I am, art thou also with me ! 
I will arrange for myself and Thee ; I will manage so that I 
can live with thee ; and what a life ! ! ! But as it is — without 
thee ! ! ! Persecuted here and there by the kindness of men, 
which I little deserve, and as little care to deserve. Humility of man toward man — it pains me — and when I think 
of myself in connection with the universe, what am I and 
what is He who is named the Greatest — and still this again 
shows the divine in man. I weep when I think that probably thou wilt get the first news from me only on Saturday 
evening. However much thou lovest me, my love for thee 
is stronger ; but never conceal thy thoughts from me. Good-night! As I am taking the baths I must go to bed [two 
words scratched through]. God — so near! so far! Our 
love — is it not a true heavenly edifice, firm as heaven's 
vault!