While still in bed, my thoughts press to thee, my Beloved 
One, at moments with joy, and then again with sorrow, 
waiting to see whether fate will take pity on us. Either I 
must live wholly with thee, or not at all. Yes, I have resolved to wander in distant lands, until I can fly to thy arms 
and feel that with thee I have a real home ; with thee encircling me about, I can send my soul into the kingdom of 
spirits. Yes, unfortunately, it must be so. Calm thyself, 
and all the more since thou knowest my faithfulness toward 
thee ! Never can another possess my heart, never — never — 
God ! why must one part from what one so loves — and yet 
my life in V. at present is a wretched life! Thy love has 
made me one of the happiest and, at the same time, one of 
the unhappiest of men ; at my age I need a quiet, steady life 
— but is that possible in our situation? My Angel, I have 
just heard that the post goes every day, and I must therefore stop, so that you may receive the letter without delay. 
Be calm — only by calm consideration of our existence can 
we attain our aim to live together; be calm — love me — 
today — yesterday — what tearful longing after thee — thee 
— thee — my life — my all — farewell! Oh, continue to love 
me — never, never misjudge the faithful heart.

ye men who regard or declare me to be malignant, stubborn, or cynical, how unjust are ye towards me ! You do 
not know the secret cause of my seeming so. From childhood onward, my heart and mind prompted me to be kind 
and tender, and I was ever inclined to accomplish great 
deeds. But only think that, during the last six years, I 
have been in a wretched condition, rendered worse by unintelligent physicians, deceived from year to year with hopes 
of improvement, and then finally forced to the prospect of
lasting infirmity (which may last for years, or even be totally incurable). Born with a fiery, active temperament, 
even susceptive of the diversions of society, I had soon to 
retire from the world, to live a solitary life. At times, even, 
I endeavored to forget all this, but how harshly was I driven 
back by the redoubled experience of my bad hearing ! Yet 
it was not possible for me to say to men: Speak louder, 
shout, for I am deaf. Alas ! how could I declare the weak- 
ness of a sense which in me ought to be more acute than in 
others — a sense which formerly I possessed in highest perfection, a perfection such as few in my profession enjoy or 
ever have enjoyed ; no, I cannot do it. Forgive, therefore, 
if you see me withdraw, when I would willingly mix with 
you. My misfortune pains me doubly in that I am certain to 
be misunderstood. For me there can be no recreation in 
the society of my fellow creatures, no refined conversations, 
no interchange of thought. Almost alone, and mixing in 
society only when absolutely necessary, I am compelled to 
live as an exile. If I approach near to people, a feeling of 
hot anxiety comes over me lest my condition should be noticed — for so it was during these past six months which I 
spent in the country. Ordered by my intelligent physician 
to spare my hearing as much as possible, he almost fell in 
with my present frame of mind, although many a time I was 
carried away by my sociable inclinations. But how humiliating was it, when some one standing close to me heard a 
distant flute, and I heard nothing, or a shepherd singing, 
and again I heard nothing. Such incidents almost droVe me 
to despair ; at times I was on the point of putting an end to 
my life — art alone restrained my hand. Oh ! it seemed as if 
I could not quit this earth until I had produced all I felt 
within me, and so I continued this wretched life — wretched, 
indeed, and with so sensitive a body that a somewhat sud- 
den change can throw me from the best into the worst state. 
Patience, I am told, I must choose as my guide. I have 
done so — lasting, I hope, will be my resolution to bear up 
until it pleases the inexorable Parcte to break the thread.