Forced already, in my 28th year, to become a philosopher, 
it is not easy — for an artist more difficult than for any one 
else. Divine Being, Thou who lookest down into my inmost soul. Thou understandest ; Thou knowest that love for 
mankind and a desire to do good dwell therein! Oh, my 
fellow men, when one day you read this, remember that you 
were unjust to me and let the unfortunate one console himself if he can find one like himself, who, in spite of all obstacles which nature has thrown in his way, has still done 
everything in his power to be received into the ranks of 

worthy artists and men. You, my brothers Carl and , 

as soon as I am dead, beg Professor Schmidt, if he be still 
living, to describe my malady; and annex this written account to that of my illness, so that at least the world, so far 
as is possible, may become reconciled to me after my death. 
And now I declare you both heirs to my small fortune (if 
such it may be called). Divide it honorably and dwell in 
peace, and help each other. What you have done against 
me has, as you know, long been forgiven. And you, brother 
Carl, I especially thank you for the attachment you have 
shown toward me of late. My prayer is that your life may 
be better, less troubled by cares, than mine. Recommend to 
your children virtue; it alone can bring happiness, not 
money. I speak from experience. It was virtue which bore 
me up in time of trouble; to her, next to my art, I owe 
thanks for my not having laid violent hands on myself. 
Farewell, and love one another. My thanks to all friends, 
especially Prince Lichnowski and Professor Schmidt. I 
should much like one of you to keep as an heirloom the instruments given to me by Prince L., but let no strife arise 
between you concerning them ; if money should be of more 
service to you, just sell them. How happy I feel, that, even 
when lying in my grave, I may be useful to you ! 

So let it be. I joyfully hasten to meet death. If it come 
before I have had opportunity to develop all my artistic 
faculties, it will come, my hard fate notwithstanding, too 
soon, and I should probably wish it later — yet even then I
shall be happy, for will it not deliver me from a state of 
endless suffering? Come when thou wilt, I shall face thee 
courageously. Farewell, and when I am dead do not entirely forget me. This I deserve from you, for during my 
lifetime I often thought of you, and how to make you happy. 
Be ye so. 

You receive herewith, honored Therese, what I promised, 
and had it not been for serious hindrances you would have 
received more, in order to show you that I always offer 
more to my friends than I actually promise. I hope and 
have every reason to believe that you are nicely occupied 
and as pleasantly entertained — but I hope not too much, so 
that you may also think of us. It would probably be expecting too much of you, or overrating my own importance, if 
I ascribed to you : ' ' Men are not only together when they 
are together ; even he who is far away, who has departed, is 
still in our thoughts." Who would ascribe anything of the 
kind to the lively T., who takes life so easily? 

Pray do not forget the pianoforte among your occupations, or, indeed, music generally. You have such fine talent 
for it. Why not devote j'^ourself entirely to it — you who 
have such feeling for all that is beautiful and good ? Why 
will you not make use of this, in order that you may recognize in so beautiful an art the higher perfection which casts 
down its rays even on us. I am very solitary and quiet, although lights now and again might awaken me; but since 
you all went away from here, I feel in me a void which 
cannot be filled ; my art, even otherwise so faithful to me, 
has not been able to gain any triumph. Your piano is ordered, and you will soon receive it. 