You perceive that I am not speaking here of the endeavor 
to make others similar to ourselves, nor of the conviction 
that what is exhibited in one is essential to all ; it is merely 
my aim to ascertain the true relation between our individual 
life and the common nature of man, and clearly to set it 
forth. But the peculiar object of this desire for communication is unquestionably that in which man feels that he is 
originally passive, namely, his observations and emotions. 
He is here impelled by the eager wish to know whether the 
power which has produced them in him be not something 
foreign and unworthy. Hence we see man employed, from 
his very childhood, in communicating those observations 
and emotions; the conceptions of his understanding, concerning whose origin there can be no doubt, he allows 
to rest in his own mind, and still more easily he determines to refrain from the expression of his judgments; 
but whatever acts upon his senses, whatever awakens 
his feelings, of that he desires to obtain witnesses, with 
regard to that he longs for those who will sympathize 
with him. How should he keep to himself those very operations of the world upon his soul which are the most universal 
and comprehensive, which appear to him as of the most 
stupendous and resistless magnitude? How should he be 
willing to lock up within his own bosom those very emotions 
which impel him with the greatest power beyond himself, 
and in the indulgence of which he becomes conscious that 
he can never understand his own nature from himself alone ? 
It will rather be his first endeavor, whenever a religious 
view gains clearness in his eye, or a pious feeling penetrates his soul, to direct the attention of others to the same 
object, and, as far as possible, to communicate to their 
hearts the elevated impulses of his own. 

If, then, the religious man is urged by his nature to speak, 
it is the same nature which secures to him the certainty 
of hearers. There is no element of his being with which, 
at the same time, there is implanted in man such a lively 
feeling of his total inability to exhaust it by himself alone, 
as with that of religion. A sense of religion has no sooner 
dawned upon him, than he feels the infinity of its nature 
and the limitation of his own; he is conscious of embracing 
but a small portion of it ; and that which he cannot immediately reach he wishes to perceive, as far as he can, from 
the representations of others who have experienced it themselves, and to enjoy it with them. Hence, he is anxious 
to observe every manifestation of it ; and, seeking to supply 
his own deficiencies, he watches for every tone which he 
recognizes as proceeding from it. In this manner, mutual 
communications are instituted; in this manner, every one 
feels equally the need both of speaking and hearing. 

But the imparting of religion is not to be sought in books, 
like that of intellectual conceptions and scientific knowledge. 
The pure impression of the original product is too far 
destroyed in this medium, which, in the same way that dark-colored objects absorb the greatest proportion of the rays 
of light, swallows up everything belonging to the pious emotions of the heart, which cannot be embraced in the insufficient symbols from which it is intended again to proceed. 
Nay, in the written commmiications of religious feeling, 
everything needs a double and triple representation; for 
that which originally represented, must be represented in 
its turn; and yet the effect on the whole man, in its com- 
plete unity, can only be imperfectly set forth by continued 
and varied reflections. It is only when religion is driven 
out from the society of the living, that it must conceal its 
manifold life under the dead letter. 