Neither can this intercourse of heart with heart, on the 
deepest feelings of humanity, be carried on in common conversation. Many persons, who are filled with zeal for the 
interests of religion, have brought it as a reproach against 
the manners of our age that, while all other important subjects are so freely discussed in the intercourse of society, 
so little should be said concerning God and divine things. 
I would defend ourselves against this charge by maintaining that this circumstance, at least, does not indicate contempt or indifference toward religion, but a happy and 
very correct instinct. In the presence of joy and merriment, where earnestness itself must yield to raillery and 
wit, there can be no place for that which should be always 
surrounded with holy veneration and awe. Religious views, 
pious emotions, and serious considerations with regard to 
them — these we cannot throw out to one another in such 
small crumbs as the topics of a light conversation; and 
when the discourse turns upon sacred subjects, it would 
rather be a crime than a virtue to have an answer ready 
for every question, and a rejoinder for every remark. 
Hence, the religious sentiment retires from such circles as 
are too wide for it, to the more confidential intercourse of 
friendship, and to the mutual communications of love, 
where the eye and the countenance are more expressive than 
words, and where even a holy silence is understood. But 
it is impossible for divine things to be treated in the usual 
manner of society, where the conversation consists in striking flashes of thought, gaily and rapidly alternating with
one another ; a more elevated style is demanded for the communication of religion, and a different kind of society, 
which is devoted to this purpose, must hence be formed. It 
is becoming, indeed, to apply the whole richness and magnificence of human discourse to the loftiest subject which 
language can reach — not as if there were any adornment, 
with which religion could not dispense, but because it would 
show a frivolous and unholy disposition in its heralds if 
they did not bring together the most copious resources 
within their power and consecrate them all to religion, 
so that they might thus perhaps exhibit it in its appropriate 
greatness and dignity. Hence it is impossible, without the 
aid of poetry, to give utterance to the religious sentiment 
in any other than an oratorical manner, \vith all the skill 
and energy of language, and freely using, in addition, the 
service of all the arts which can contribute to flowing and 
impassioned discourse. He, therefore, whose heart is overflowing with religion, can open his mouth only before an 
auditory, where that which is presented, with such a wealth 
of preparation, can produce the most extended and manifold effects. 

Would that I could present before you an image of the 
rich and luxurious life in this city of God, when its inhabitants come together each in the fulness of his own inspiration, which is ready to stream forth without constraint, but, 
at the same time, each is filled with a holy desire to receive 
and to appropriate to himself everything which others wish 
to bring before him. If one comes forward before the rest, 
it is not because he is entitled to this distinction, in virtue 
of an office or of a previous agreement, nor because pride 
and conceitedness have given him presumption ; it is rather 
a free impulse of the spirit, a sense of the most heartfelt 
unity of each with all, a consciousness of entire equality, 
a mutual renunciation of all First and Last, of all the 
arrangements of earthly order.