He comes forward in order to communicate to others, as an object of sympathizing contemplation, the deepest feelings of his soul while
under the influence of God; to lead them to the domain 
of religion in which he breathes his native air; and to 
infect them with the contagion of his own holy emotions. 
He speaks forth the Divine which stirs his bosom, and in 
holy silence the assembly follows the inspiration of his 
words. Whether he unveils a secret mystery, or with prophetic confidence connects the future with the present; 
whether he strengthens old impressions by new examples, 
or is led by the lofty visions of his burning imagination 
into other regions of the world and into another order of 
things, the practised sense of his audience everywhere 
accompanies his own; and when he returns into himself 
from his wanderings through the kingdom of God, his own 
heart and that of each of his hearers are the common 
dwelling-place of the same emotion. 

If, now, the agreement of his sentiments Avith that which 
they feel be announced to him, whether loudly or low, then 
are holy mysteries — not merely significant emblems, but, 
justly regarded, natural indications of a peculiar consciousness and peculiar feelings — invented and celebrated, a 
higher choir, as it were, which in its own lofty language 
answers to the appealing voice. But not only, so to speak ; 
for as such a discourse is music without tune or measure, 
so there is also a music among the Holy, which may be 
called discourse without words, the most distinct and expressive utterance of the inward man. The Muse of Harmony, whose intimate relation with religion, although it 
has been for a long time spoken of and described, is yet 
recognized only by few, has alwaj^s presented upon her 
altars the most perfect and magnificent productions of her 
selectest scholars in honor of religion. It is in sacred 
hjTnns and choirs, with which the words of the poet are 
connected only by slight and airy bands, that those feelings 
are breathed forth which precise language is unable to contain; and thus the tones of thought and emotion alternate 
with each other in mutual support, until all is satisfied and 
filled with the Holy and the Infinite. Of this character is
the influence of religious men upon one another; such is 
their natural and eternal union. Do not take it ill of them 
that this heavenly bond — the most consummate product of 
the social nature of man, but to which it does not attain 
until it becomes conscious of its own high and peculiar 
significance — that this should be deemed of more value in 
their sight than the political union which you esteem so 
far above everything else, but which will nowhere ripen to 
manly beauty, and which, compared with the former, 
appears far more constrained than free, far more transitory 
than eternal. 

But where now, in the description which I have given of 
the community of the pious, is that distinction between 
priests and laymen, which you are accustomed to designate 
as the source of so many evils! A false appearance has 
deceived you. This is not a distinction between persons, but 
only one of condition and performance. Every man is a 
priest, so far as he draws others around him, into the 
sphere which he has appropriated to himself and in which 
he professes to be a master. Every one is a layman, so far 
as he is guided by the counsel and experience of another, 
within the sphere of religion, where he is comparatively a 
stranger. There is not here the tyrannic aristocracy, 
which you describe with such hatred; but this society is a 
priestly people, a perfect republic, where every one is alternately ruler and citizen, where every one follows the same 
power in another which he feels also in himself, and with 
which he, too, governs others.