How then could the spirit of discord and division — which 
you regard as the inevitable consequence of all religious 
combinations — find a congenial home within this sphere? 
I see nothing but that All is One, and that all the differences which actually exist in religion, by means of this very 
union of the pious, are gently blended with one another. I 
have directed your attention to the different degrees of 
religiousness, I have pointed out to you the different modes 
of insight and the different directions in which the soul
seeks for itself the supreme object of its pursuit. Do you 
imagine that this must needs give birth to sects, and thus 
destroy all free and reciprocal intercourse in religion? It 
is true, indeed, in contemplation, that everything which is 
separated into various parts and embraced in different 
divisions, must be opposed and contradictory to itself; but 
consider, I pray you, how Life is manifested in a great 
variety of forms, how the most hostile elements seek out 
one another here, and, for this very reason, what we separate in contemplation all flows together in life. They, to be 
sure, who on one of these points bear the greatest resemblance to one another, will present the strongest mutual 
attraction, but they cannot, on that account, compose an 
independent whole; for the degrees of this affinity imperceptibly diminish and increase, and in the midst of so many 
transitions there is no absolute repulsion, no total separation, even between the most discordant elements. Take 
which you will of these masses which have assumed an 
organic form according to their own inherent energy; if 
you do not forcibly divide them by a mechanical operation, 
no one will exhibit an absolutely distinct and homogeneous 
character, but the extreme points of each will be connected 
at the same time with those which display different properties and properly belong to another mass. 

If the pious individuals, who stand on the same degree 
of a lower order, form a closer union with one another, 
there are yet some always included in the combination who 
have a presentiment of higher things. These are better 
understood by all who belong to a higher social class than 
they understand themselves ; and there is a point of sympathy between the two which is concealed only from the 
latter. If those combine in whom one of the modes 
of insight, which I have described, is predominant, 
there will always be some among them who understand at 
least both of the modes, and since they, in some degree, 
belong to both, they form a connecting link between two 
spheres which would otherwise be separated. Thus the
individual who is more inclined to cherish a religious connection between himself and nature, is yet by no means 
opposed, in the essentials of religion, to him who prefers 
to trace the footsteps of the Godhead in history ; and there 
will never be wanting those who can pursue both paths with 
equal facility. Thus in whatever manner you divide the 
vast province of religion, you will always come back to the 
same point.
If unbounded universality of insight be the first and 
original supposition of religion, and hence also, most naturally, its fairest and ripest fruit, you perceive that it cannot be otherwise than that, in proportion as an individual 
advances in religion and the character of his piety becomes 
more pure, the whole religious world will more and more 
appear to him as an indivisible whole. The spirit of separation, in proportion as it insists upon a rigid division, is 
a proof of imperfection; the highest and most cultivated 
minds always perceive a universal connection, and, for the 
very reason that they perceive it, they also establish it. 
Since every one comes in contact only with his immediate 
neighbor, but, at the same time, has an immediate neighbor 
on all sides and in every direction, he is, in fact, indissolubly 
linked in with the whole. Mystics and Naturalists in 
religion, they to whom the Godhead is a personal Being, 
and they to whom it is not, they who have arrived at a systematic view of the Universe, and they who behold it only 
in its elements or only in obscure chaos — all, notwithstanding, should be only one, for one band surrounds them all and 
they can be totally separated only by a violent and arbitrary force; every specific combination is nothing but an 
integral part of the whole; its peculiar characteristics are 
almost evanescent, and are gradually lost in outlines that 
become more and more indistinct; and at least those who 
feel themselves thus united will always be the superior 
portion. 