Not merely to know, but to act according to thy 
knowledge, is thy destination." So says the 
voice which cries to me aloud from my innermost soul, so soon as I collect and give heed 
to myself for a moment. " Not idly to inspect and contemplate thyself, nor to brood over devout 
sensations — no! thou existest to act. Thine actions, and 
only thine actions, determine thy worth. "

Shall I refuse obedience to that inward voice? I will 
not do it. I will choose voluntarily the destination which 
the impulse imputes to me. And I will grasp, together 
with this determination, the thought of its reality and 
truth, and of the reality of all that it presupposes. I 
will hold to the viewpoint of natural thinking, which 
this impulse assigns to me, and renounce all those 
morbid speculations and refinements of the understanding 
which alone could make me doubt its truth. I understand 
thee now, sublime Spirit ! I have found the organ with 
which I grasp this reality, and with it, probably, all other 
reality. Knowledge is not that organ. No knowledge can 
prove and demonstrate itself. Every knowledge presupposes a higher as its foundation, and this upward process 
has no end. It is Faith, that voluntary reposing in the 
view which naturally presents itself, because it is the only-one by which we can fulfil our destination — this it is that 
first gives assent to knowledge, and exalts to certainty and 
conviction what might otherwise be mere illusion. It is 
not knowledge, but a determination of the will to let knowledge pass for valid. I hold fast, then, forever to this 
expression. It is not a mere difference of terms, but a real 
deep-grounded distinction, exercising a very important influence on my whole mental disposition. All my conviction 
is only faith, and is derived from a disposition of the mind, 
not from the understanding. 

There is only one point to which I have to direct incessantly all my thoughts : What I must do, and how I shall 
most effectually accomplish what is required of me. All 
my thinking must have reference to my doing — must be 
considered as means, however remote, to this end. Otherwise, it is an empty, aimless sport, a waste of time and 
power, and perversion of a noble faculty which was given 
me for a very different purpose. 

I may hope, I may promise myself with certainty, that 
when I think after this manner, my thinking shall be attended with practical results. Nature, in which I am to 
act, is not a foreign being, created without regard to me, 
into which I can never penetrate. It is fashioned by the 
laws of my own thought, and must surely coincide with 
them. It must be everywhere transparent, cognizable, 
permeable to me, in its innermost recesses. Everywhere it 
expresses nothing but relations and references of myself 
to myself ; and as certainly as I may hope to know myself, 
so certainly I may promise myself that I shall be able to 
explore it. Let me but seek what I have to seek, and I 
shall find. Let me but inquire whereof I have to inquire, 
and I shall receive answer.