That voice in my interior, which I believe, and for the 
sake of which I believe all else that I believe, commands
me not merely to act in the abstract. That is impossible. All 
these general propositions are formed only by my volun- 
tary attention and reflection directed to various facts; but 
they do not express a single fact of themselves. This voice 
of my conscience prescribes to me with certainty, in each 
particular situation of my existence, what I must do and 
what I must avoid in that situation. It accompanies me, 
if I will but listen to it with attention, through all the events 
of my life, and never refuses its reward where I am called 
to act. It establishes immediate conviction, and irresistibly 
compels my assent. It is impossible for me to contend 
against it. 

To harken to that voice, honestly and dispassionately, 
without fear and without useless speculation to obey it — 
this is my sole destination, this the whole aim of my existence. My life ceases to be an empty sport, without truth 
or meaning. There is something to be done, simply because 
it must be done — namely, that which conscience demands of 
me who find myself in this particular position. I exist 
solely in order that it may be fulfilled. To perceive it, I 
have understanding; to do it, power. 

Through these commandments of conscience alone come 
truth and reality into my conceptions. I cannot refuse 
attention and obedience to them without renouncing my 
destination. I cannot, therefore, mthhold my belief in the 
reality which they bring before me, without, at the same 
time, denying my destination. It is absolutely true, without 
further examination and demonstration — it is the first 
truth and the foundation of all other tmth and certainty — 
that I must obey that voice. Consequently, according to 
this way of thinking, everything becomes true and real for 
me which the possibility of such obedience presupposes.

There hover before me phenomena in space, to which I 
transfer the idea of my own being. I represent them to 
myself as beings of my own kind. Consistent specula- 
tion has taught me or will teach me that these supposed 
rational beings, without me, are only products of my own
conception ; that I am necessitated, once for all, by laws of 
thought which can be shown to exist, to represent the idea 
of myself out of myself, and that, according to the same 
laws, this idea can be transferred only to certain definite perceptions. But the voice of my conscience cries 
to me : "Whatever these beings may be in and for themselves, thou shalt treat them as subsisting for themselves, as 
free, self-existing beings, entirely independent of thyself. 
Take it for granted that they are capable of proposing to 
themselves aims independently of thee, by their own power. 
Never disturb the execution of these, their designs, but 
further them rather, with all thy might. Respect their 
liberty. Embrace with love their objects as thine own." 
So must I act. And to such action shall, will, and must all 
my thinking be directed, if I have but formed the purpose 
to obey the voice of my conscience. Accordingly, I shall 
ever consider those beings as beings subsisting for themselves, and forming and accomplishing aims independently 
of me. From this viewpoint, I cannot consider them in 
any other light; and the above-mentioned speculation will 
vanish like an empty dream before my eyes. "I think of 
them as beings of my own species," said I just now; but 
strictly, it is not a thought by which they are first represented to me as such. It is the voice of conscience, the 
command : "Here restrain thy liberty, here suppose and 
respect foreign aims." This it is which is first translated 
into the thought : "Here is surely and truly, subsisting of 
itself, a being like me." To consider them otherwise, I 
must first deny the voice of my conscience in life and forget 
it in speculation.