There hover before me other phenomena which I do 
not consider as beings like myself, but as irrational objects. 
Speculation finds it easy to show how the conception of 
such objects develops itself purely from my power of conception and its necessary modes of action. But I comprehend these same things also through need and craving and 
enjoyment. It is not the conception — no, it is hunger and
thirst and the satisfaction of these that makes anything 
food and drink to me. Of course, I am constrained to 
believe in the reality of that which threatens my sensuous 
existence, or which alone can preserve it. Conscience comes 
in, at once hallowing and limiting this impulse of Nature. 
" Thou shalt preserve, exercise and strengthen thyself, and 
thy sensuous power ; for this sensuous power forms a part 
of the calculation, in the plan of reason. But thou canst 
preserve it only by a suitable use, agreeable to the peculiar 
interior laws of such matters. And, besides thyself, there 
are also others like thee, whose powers are calculated upon 
like thine own, and who can be preserved only in the same 
way. Allow to them the same use of their portion which it 
is granted thee to make of thine o"\vn portion. Respect 
what comes to them, as their property. Use what comes 
to thee in a suitable manner, as thy property." So must 
I act, and I must think conformably to such action. Accordingly, I am necessitated to regard these things as standing 
under their own natural laws, independent of me, but which 
I am capable of knowing; that is, to ascribe to them an 
existence independent of myself. I am constrained to 
believe in such laws, and it becomes my business to ascertain them ; and empty speculation vanishes like mist when 
the warming sun appears. 

In short, there is for me, in general, no pure, naked existence, with which I have no concern, and which I contemplate solely for the sake of contemplation. "Whatever 
exists for me, exists only by virtue of its relation to me. 
But there is everywhere but one relation to me possible, 
and all the rest are but varieties of this, i. e., my destination as a moral agent. My world is the object and sphere 
of my duties, and absolutely nothing else. There is no 
other world, no other attributes of my world, for me. My 
collective capacity and all finite capacity is insufficient to 
comprehend any other.Everything which exists for me 
forces its existence and its reality upon me, solely by means 
of this relation; and only by means of this relation do I grasp it. There is utterly wanting in me an organ for 
any other existence. 

To the question whether then in fact such a world exists 
as I represent to myself, I can answer nothing certain, 
nothing which is raised above all doubt, but this: I have 
assuredly and truly these definite duties which represent 
themselves to me as duties toward such and such persons, 
concerning such and such objects. These definite duties 
I cannot represent to myself otherwise, nor can I execute 
them otherwise, than as lying within the sphere of such a 
world as I conceive.