Even he who has never thought of his 
moral destination, if any such there could be, or who, if 
he has thought about it at all, has never entertained the 
slightest purpose of ever, in the indefinite future, fulfilling 
it — even he derives his world of the senses and his belief in 
the reality of such a world no otherwise than from his idea 
of a moral world. If he does not comprehend it through 
the idea of his duties, he certainly does so through the requisition of his rights. Wliat he does not require of himself 
he yet requires of others, in relation to himself — that they 
treat him with care and consideration, agreeably to his 
nature, not as an irrational thing, but as a free and selfsubsisting being. And so he is constrained, in order that 
they may comply with this demand, to think of them also 
as rational, free, self-subsisting, and independent of 
the mere force of Nature. And even though he should 
never propose to himself any other aim in the use and 
fruition of the objects which surround him than that of 
enjoying them, he still demands this enjoyment as a right, 
of which others must leave him in undisturbed possession. 
Accordingly, he comprehends even the irrational world of 
the senses through a moral idea. No one who lives a conscious life can renounce these claims to be respected as 
rational and self-subsisting. And with these claims at least 
there is connected in his soul a seriousness, an abandonment 
of doubt, a belief in a reality, if not with the acknowledgment of a moral law in his innermost being. Do but assail 
him who denies his own moral destination and your existence and the existence of a corporeal world, except in the 
way of experiment, to try what speculation can do — assail 
him actively, carry his principles into life, and act as if he 
either did not exist, or as if he were a piece of rude matter, 
and he will soon forget the joke; he will become seriously 
angry with you, he will seriously reprove you for treating 
him so, and maintain that you ought not and must not do 
so to him; and, in this way, he will practically admit that 
you really possess the power of acting upon him, that he 
exists, that you exist, and that there exists a medium 
through which you act upon him; and that you have at 
least duties toward him. 
Hence it is not the action of supposed objects without 
us, which exist for us only and for which we exist only in 
so far as we already know of them; just as little is it an 
empty fashioning, by means of our imagination and our 
thinking, whose products would appear to us as such, as 
empty pictures; it is not these, but the necessary faith 
in our liberty and our power, in our veritable action and 
in definite laws of human action, which serves as the foundation of all consciousness of a reality without us, a consciousness which is itself but a belief, since it rests on a 
belief, but one which follows necessarily from that belief. 
We are compelled to assume that we act in general, and 
that we ought to act in a certain way; we are compelled 
to assume a certain sphere of such action — this sphere being the truly and actually existing world as we find it. And 
vice versa, this world is absolutely nothing but that sphere, 
and by no means extends beyond it. The consciousness of 
the actual world proceeds from the necessity of action, and 
not the reverse — i. e., the necessity of action from the consciousness of such a world. The necessity is first not the 
consciousness; that is derived. We do not act because 
we agnize, but we agnize because we are destined to act. 
Practical reason is the root of all reason. 