The laws of action for rational beings are immediately certain; their 
world is certain only because they are certain. Were we 
to renounce the former, the world, and, with it, ourselves, 
we should sink into absolute nothing. We raise ourselves 
out of this nothing, and sustain ourselves above this nothing, solely by means of our morality. 
When I contemplate the world as it is, independently of 
any command, there manifests itself in my interior the 
wish, the longing, no ! not a longing merely — the absolute 
demand for a better world. I cast a glance at the relations 
of men to one another and to Nature, at the weakness of 
their powers, at the strength of their appetites and passions. It cries to me irresistibly from my innermost soul : 
"Thus it cannot possibly be destined always to remain. 
It must, it must all become other and better !" 

I can in no wise imagine to myself the present condition 
of man as that which is designed to endure. I cannot 
imagine it to be his whole and final destination. If so, then 
would everything be dream and delusion, and it would not 
be worth the trouble to have lived and to have taken part 
in this ever-recurring, aimless, and unmeaning game. 
Only so far as I can regard this condition as the means of 
something better, as a point of transition to a higher and 
more perfect, does it acquire any value for me. Not on its 
own account, but on account of something better for which 
it prepares the way, can I bear it, honor it, and joyfully 
fulfil my part in it. My mind can find no place, nor rest 
a moment, in the present; it is irresistibly repelled by it. 
My whole life streams irrepressibly on toward the future 
and better. 
Am I only to eat and to drink that I may hunger and 
thirst again, and again eat and drink, until the grave, yawning beneath my feet, swallows me up, and I myself spring 
up as food from the ground? Am I to beget beings like 
myself, that they also may eat and drink and die, and leave
behind them beings like themselves, who shall do the same 
that I have done ? To what purpose this circle which perpetually returns into itself ; this game forever re-commencing, after the same manner, in which everything is born 
but to perish, and perishes but to be born again as it was ; 
this monster which forever devours itself that it may produce itself again, and which produces itself that it may 
again devour itself? 

Never can this be the destination of my being and of all 
being. There must be something which exists because it 
has been brought forth, and which now remains and can 
never be brought forth again after it has been brought 
forth once. And this, that is permanent, must beget itself 
amid the mutations of the perishing, and continue amid 
those mutations, and be borne along unhurt upon the waves 
of time. 