As yet our race wrings with difficulty its sustenance and 
its continuance from reluctant Nature. As yet the larger 
portion of mankind are bowed down their whole life long 
by hard labor, to procure sustenance for themselves and 
the few who think for them. Immortal spirits are compelled to fix all their thinking and scheming, and all their 
efforts, on the soil which bears them nourishment. It often 
comes to pass as yet, that when the laborer has ended, and 
promises himself, for his pains, the continuance of his own 
existence and of those pains, then hostile elements 
destroy in a moment what he had been slowly and carefully 
preparing for years, and delivers up the industrious painstaking man, without any fault of his own, to hunger and 
misery. It often comes to pass as yet, that inundations, 
storm-winds, volcanoes, desolate whole countries, and mingle works which bear the impress of a rational mind, as 
well as their authors, with the wild chaos of death and 
destruction. Diseases still hurry men into a premature 
grave, men in the bloom of their powers, and children whose 
existence passes away without fruit or result. The pestilence still stalks through blooming states, leaves the
few who escape it bereaved and alone, deprived of the 
accustomed aid of their companions, and does all in its 
power to give back to the wilderness the land which the 
industry of man had already conquered for its own. 

So it is, but so it cannot surely have been intended always 
to remain. No work which bears the impress of reason, 
and which was undertaken for the purpose of extending the 
dominion of reason, can be utterly lost in the progress of 
the times. The sacrifices which the irregular violence of 
Nature draws from reason must at least weary, satisfy, 
and reconcile that violence. The force which has caused 
injury by acting without rule cannot be intended to do so 
in that way any longer, it cannot be destined to renew itself; 
it must be used up, from this time forth and forever, by that 
one outbreak. All those outbreaks of rude force, before 
which human power vanishes into nothing — those desolat- 
ing hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanoes, can be nothing else 
but the final struggle of the wild mass against the lawfully 
progressive, life-giving, systematic course to which it is 
compelled, contrary to its own impulse. They can be 
nothing but the last concussive strokes in the formation of 
our globe, now about to perfect itself. That opposition 
must gradually become weaker and at last exhausted, since, 
in the lawful course of things, there can be nothing that 
should renew its power. That formation must at last be 
perfected, and our destined abode complete. Nature must 
gradually come into a condition in which we can count with 
certainty upon her equal step, and in which her power 
shall keep unaltered a definite relation with that power 
which is destined to govern it, that is, the human. So far 
as this relation already exists and the systematic development of Nature has gained firm footing, the workmanship 
of man, by its mere existence and its effects, independent 
of any design on the part of the author, is destined to 
react upon Nature and to represent in her a new and life-giving principle. Cultivated lands are to quicken and mitigate the sluggish, hostile atmosphere of the eternal forests,
wildernesses, and morasses. Well-ordered and diversified 
culture is to diffuse through the air a new principle of life 
and fructification, and the sun to send forth its most animating beams into that atmosphere which is breathed by 
a healthy, industrious, and ingenious people. Science, 
awakened, at first, by the pressure of necessity, shall hereafter penetrate deliberately and calmly into the unchangeable laws of Nature, overlook her whole power, and learn 
to calculate her possible developments — shall form for 
itself a new Nature in idea, attach itself closely to the living 
and active, and follow hard upon her footsteps. And all 
knowledge which reason has wrung from Nature shall be 
preserved in the course of the times and become the foundation of further knowledge, for the common understanding of our race. Thus shall Nature become ever more 
transparent and penetrable to human perception, even to 
its innermost secrets. And human power, enlightened and 
fortified with its inventions, shall rule her with ease and 
peacefully maintain the conquest once effected. By degrees, there shall be needed no greater outlay of mechanical 
labor than the human body requires for its development, 
cultivation and health. And this labor shall cease to be a 
burden ; for the rational being is not destined to be a bearer 
of burdens. 