But it is not Nature, it is liberty itself, that occasions the 
most numerous and the most fearful disorders among our 

kind. The direst enemy of man is man. 


It is the destination of our race to unite in one body, 
thoroughly acquainted with itself in all its parts, and uniformly cultivated in all. Nature, and even the passions 
and vices of mankind, have, from the beginning, drifted 
toward this goal. A large part of the road which leads 
to it is already put behind us, and we may count with certainty that this goal, which is the condition of further, 
united progress, will be reached in due season. Do not 
ask History whether mankind, on the whole, have grown 
more purely moral! They have grown to extended, comprehensive, forceful acts of arbitrary will; but it was 
almost a necessity of their condition that they should direct 
that will exclusively to evil. 

Neither ask History whether the esthetic education and 
the rationalistic culture of the understanding, of the fore-world, concentrated upon a few single points, may not have 
far exceeded, in degree, that of modern times. It might be 
that the answer would put us to shame, and that the human 
race in growing older would appear, in this regard, not to 
have advanced, but to have lost ground. 

But ask History in what period the existing culture was 
most widely diffused and distributed among the greatest 
number of individuals. Undoubtedly it will be found that, 
from the beginning of history down to our own day, the 
few light-points of culture have extended their rays farther 
and farther from their centres, have seized one individual 
after another, and one people after another; and that this 
diffusion of culture is still going on before our eyes. 

And this was the first goal of Humanity, on its infinite 
path. Until this is attained, until the existing culture of 
an age is diffused over the whole habitable globe, and our 
race is made capable of the most unlimited communication 
with itself, one nation, one quarter of the globe, must await 
the other, on their common path, and each must bring its 
centuries of apparent standing still or retrogradation, as 
a sacrifice to the common bond, for the sake of which, alone, 
they themselves exist. 

When this first goal shall be attained, when everything 
useful that has been discovered at one end of the earth 
shall immediately be made known and imparted to all, then 
Humanity, without interruption, without cessation, and 
without retrocession, with united force, and with one step 
shall raise itself up to a degree of culture which we lack 
power to conceive. 