By the institution of this one true State and the firm 
establishment of internal peace, external war also, at 
least between true States, will be rendered impossible.
Even for the sake of its own advantage — in order 
that no thought of injustice, plunder and violence may 
spring up in its own subjects, and no possible opportunity be afforded them for any gain, except by labor 
and industry, in the sphere assigned by law — every State 
must forbid as strictly, must hinder as carefully, must compensate as exactly, and punish as severely, an injury done 
to the citizen of a neighbor-State, as if it were inflicted 
upon a fellow-citizen. This law respecting the security of 
its neighbors is necessary to every State which is not a 
community of robbers. And herewith the possibility of 
every just complaint of one State against another, and 
every case of legitimate defense, are done away. 

There are no necessarily and continuously direct rela- 
tions between States, as such, that could engender war- 
fare. As a general rule, it is only through the relations of 
single citizens of one State with the citizens of another — 
it is only in the person of one of its members, that a State 
can be injured. But this injury will be instantly redressed, and the offended State satisfied. 

That a whole nation should determine, for the sake 
of plunder, to attack a neighboring country with war, 
is impossible, since in a State in which all are equal 
the plunder would not become the booty of a few, but must 
be divided equally among all, and, so divided, the portion 
of each individual would never repay him for the trouble 
of a war. Only, then, when the advantage to be gained 
falls to the lot of a few oppressors, but the disadvantages, 
the trouble, the cost fall upon a countless army of slaves — 
only then is a war of plunder possible or conceivable. 
Accordingly, these States have no war to fear from States 
like themselves, but only from savages or barbarians, 
tempted to prey by want of skill to enrich themselves by 
industry ; or from nations of slaves, who are driven by their 
masters to procure plunder, of which they are to enjoy no 
part themselves. As to the former, each single State is undoubtedly superior to them in strength, by virtue of the arts 
of culture. As to the latter, the common advantage of all 
the States will lead them to strengthen themselves by union 
with one another. No free State can reasonably tolerate, 
in its immediate vicinity, polities whose rulers find their 
advantage in subjecting neighboring nations, and which, 
therefore, by their mere existence, perpetually threaten 
their neighbors' peace. Care for their own security will 
oblige all free States to convert all around them into free 
States like themselves, and thus, for the sake of their own 
safety, to extend the dominion of culture to the savages, 
and that of liberty to the slave nations round about them. 
And so, when once a few free States have been formed, the 
empire of culture, of liberty, and, with that, of universal 
peace, will gradually embrace the globe. 