In this only true State, all temptation to evil in general, and even the possibility of deliberately determining upon an evil act, will be cut off, and man be persuaded as powerfully as he can be to direct his will toward 
good. There is no man who loves evil because it is evil. 
He loves in it only the advantages and enjojTnents which 
it promises, and which, in the present state of Humanity, 
it, for the most part, actually affords. As long as this 
state continues, as long as a price is set upon vice, a 
thorough reformation of mankind, in the whole, is scarcely 
to be hoped for. But in such a civil Polity as should exist, 
such as reason demands, and such as the thinker easily 
describes, although as yet he nowhere finds it, and such 
as will necessarily shape itself with the first nation that is 
truly disenthralled — in such a Polity evil will offer no 
advantages, but, on the contrary, the most certain disadvantages ; and the aberration of self-love into acts of injustice will be suppressed by self-love itself. According to 
infallible regulations, in such a State, all taking advantage 
of and oppressing others, every act of self-aggrandizement 
at another's expense is not only sure to be in vain — labor
lost — but it reacts upon the author, and he himself inevitably incurs the evil which he would inflict upon others. 
Within his own State and outside of it, on the whole face of 
the earth, he finds no one whom he can injure with impunity. 
It is not, however, to be expected that any one will resolve 
upon evil merely for evil's sake, notwithstanding he cannot 
accomplish it and nothing but his o^vn injury can result 
from the attempt. The use of liberty for evil ends is done 
away. Man must either resolve to renounce his liberty 
entirely — to become, with patience, a passive wheel in the 
great machine of the whole — or he must apply his liberty 
to that which is good. 

And thus, then, in a soil so prepared, the good will easily 
flourish. When selfish aims no longer divide mankind, and 
their powers can no longer be exercised in destroying one 
another in battle, nothing will remain to them but to turn 
their united force against the conunon and only adversary 
which yet remains — resisting, uncultivated Nature. No 
longer separated by private ends, they will necessarily 
unite in one common end, and there will grow up a body 
everywhere animated by one spirit and one love. Every 
disadvantage of the individual, since it can no longer be a 
benefit to any one, becomes an injury to the whole and to 
each particular member of the same, and is felt in each 
member with equal pain, and with equal activity redressed. 
Every advance w^hich one man makes, human nature, in its 
entirety, makes with him. 

Here, where the petty, narrow self of the person is 
already annihilated by the Polity, every one loves every 
other one as truly as himself, as a component part of that 
great Self which alone remains for him to love, and of which 
he is nothing but a component part, which only through the 
Whole can gain or lose. Here the conflict of evil with good 
is done away, for no evil can any longer spring up.