The contest of the good among themselves, even concerning the 
good, vanishes, now that it has become easy to them to 
love the good for its own sake, and not for their sakes,
as the authors of it — now that the only interest they can 
have is that it come to pass, that truth be discovered, that 
the good deed be executed — not by whom it is accomplished. 
Here every one is always prepared to join his power to that 
of his neighbor, and to subordinate it to that of his neighbor. Whoever, in the judgment of all, shall accomplish the 
best, in the best way, him all will support and partake with 
equal joy in his success. 

This is the aim of earthly existence which Reason sets 
before us, and for the sure attainment of which Reason 
vouches. It is not a goal for which we are to strive merely 
that our faculties may be exercised on something great, but 
which we must relinquish all hope of realizing. It shall 
and must be realized. At some time or other this goal 
must be attained, as surely as there is a world of the 
senses, and a race of reasonable beings in time, for whom 
no serious and rational object can be imagined but this, 
and whose existence is made intelligible by this alone. 
Unless the whole life of man is to be considered as the sport 
of an evil Spirit, who implanted this ineradicable striving 
after the imperishable in the breasts of poor wretches 
merely that he might enjoy their ceaseless struggle after 
that which unceasingly flees from them, their still repeated 
grasping after that which still eludes their grasp, their restless driving about in an ever-returning circle — and laugh 
at their earnestness in this senseless sport — unless the 
wise man, who must soon see through this game and be 
tired of his own part in it, is to throw away his life, and the 
moment of awakening reason is to be the moment of earthly 
death — that goal must be attained. it is attainable in 
life and by means of life; for Reason commands me to live. 
It is attainable, for I am. 

But now, when it is attained, when Humanity shall stand 
at the goal — what then? There is no higher condition on 
earth than that. The generation which first attains it
can do nothing further than to persist in it, maintain it with 
all their powers, and die and leave descendants who shall 
do the same that they have done, and who, in their turn, 
shall leave descendants that shall do the same. Humanity 
would then stand still in its course. Therefore its earthly 
goal cannot be its highest goal, for this earthly goal is intelligible, and attainable, and finite. Though we consider the 
preceding generations as means of developing the last and 
perfected, still we cannot escape the inquiry of earnest 
Eeason: " Wherefore then these last? " Given a human 
race on the earth, its existence must indeed be in accordance 
with Reason, and not contrary to it. It must become all 
that it can become on earth. But why should it exist at all 
— this human race? Why might it not as well have remained 
in the womb of the Nothing? Reason is not for the sake of 
existence, but existence for the sake of Reason. An existence which does not, in itself, satisfy Reason and solve all 
her questions, cannot possibly be the true one. 

Then, too, are the actions commanded by the voice of 
Conscience, whose dictates I must not speculate about, but 
obey in silence — are they actually the means, and the only 
means, of accomplishing the earthly aim of mankind? That 
I cannot refer them to any other object but this, that I can 
have no other intent with them, is unquestionable. But is 
this, my intent, fulfilled in every case? Is nothing more 
needed but to will the best, in order that it may be accomplished? Alas! most of our good purposes are, for this 
world, entirely lost, and some of them seem even to have 
an entirely opposite effect to that which was proposed. On 
the other hand, the most despicable passions of men, their 
vices and their misdeeds, seem often to bring about the good 
more surely than the labors of the just man, who never consents to do evil that good may come. It would seem that 
the highest good of the world grows and thrives quite independently of all human virtues or vices, according to laws 
of its own, by some invisible and unknown power, just as 
the heavenly bodies run through their appointed course,