Lastic Art, according to the most ancient 
expression, is silent Poetry. The inventor 
of this definition no doubt meant thereby, that the former, like the latter, is to express spiritual thoughts — conceptions whose 
source is the soul; only not by speech, but, like silent 
Nature, by shape, by form, by corporeal, independent 
works. 

Plastic Art, therefore, evidently stands as a uniting link 
between the soul and Nature, and can be apprehended only 
in the living centre of both. Indeed, since Plastic Art has 
its relation to the soul in common with every other art, and 
particularly with Poetry, that by which it is connected 
with Nature, and, like Nature, a productive force, remains 
as its sole peculiarity; so that to this alone can a theory 
relate which shall be satisfactory to the understanding, 
and helpful and profitable to Art itself. 

We hope, therefore, in considering Plastic Art in relation 
to its true protot5T)e and original source. Nature, to be 
able to contribute something new to its theory — to give 
some additional exactness or clearness to the conceptions 
of it ; but, above all, to set forth the coherence of the whole 
structure of Art in the light of a higher necessity. 

But has not Science always recognized this relation? Has 
not indeed every theory of modem times taken its departure from this very position, that Art should be the imitator 
of Nature? Such has indeed been the case. But what 
should this broad general proposition profit the artist, when 
the notion of Nature is of such various interpretation, and 
when there are almost as many differing views of it as there 
are various modes of life? Thus, to one. Nature is nothing 
more than the lifeless aggregate of an indeterminable 
crowd of objects, or the space in which, as in a vessel, he 
imagines things placed; to another, only the soil from 
which he draws his nourishment and support; to the 
inspired seeker alone, the holy, ever-creative original 
energy of the world, which generates and busily evolves 
all things out of itself. 

The proposition would indeed have a high significance, if 
it taught Art to emulate this creative force; but the sense 
in which it was meant can scarcely be doubtful to one 
acquainted with the universal condition of Science at the 
time when it was first brought forward. Singular enough 
that the very persons who denied all life to Nature should 
set it up for imitation in Art ! To them might be applied 
the words of a profound writer: " Your lying philosophy 
has put Nature out of the way; and why do you call upon 
us to imitate her? Is it that you may renew the pleasure 
by perpetrating the same violence on the disciples of 
Nature? " 