Nature was to them not merely a dumb, but an altogether 
lifeless image, in whose inmost being even no living word 
dwelt; a hollow scaffolding of forms, of which as hollow 
an image was to be transferred to the canvas, or hewn out 
of stone. 

This was the proper doctrine of those more ancient and 
savage nations, who, as they saw in Nature nothing divine, 
fetched idols out of her; whilst, to the susceptive Greeks, 
who everywhere felt the presence of a vitally efficient principle, genuine gods arose out of Nature. 

But is, then, the disciple of Nature to copy everything 
in Nature without distinction ? — and, of everything, every 
part? Only beautiful objects should be represented; and, 
even in these, only the Beautiful and Perfect. 

Thus is the proposition further determined, but, at the 
same time, this asserted, that, in Nature, the perfect is 
mingled with the imperfect, the beautiful with the unbeautiful. Now, how should he who stands in no other relation 
to Nature than that of servile imitation, distinguish the 
one from the other? It is the way of imitators to appropriate the faults of their model sooner and easier than its 
excellences, since the former offer handles and tokens more 
easily grasped; and thus we see that imitators of Nature 
in this sense have imitated oftener, and even more affectionately, the ugly than the beautiful. 

If we regard in things, not their principle, but the empty 
abstract form, neither will they say anything to our soul; 
our own heart, our own spirit we must put to it, that they 
answer us. 

But what is the perfection of a thing? Nothing else 
than the creative life in it, its power to exist. Never, therefore, will he, who fancies that Nature is altogether dead, 
be successful in that profound process (analogous to the 
chemical) whence proceeds, purified as by fire, the pure 
gold of Beauty and Truth.
Nor was there any change in the main view of the relation of Art to Nature, even when the unsatisfactoriness of 
the principle began to be more generally felt; no change, 
even by the new views and new knowledge so nobly established by John Winckelmann. He indeed restored to the 
soul its full efficiency in Art, and raised it from its unworthy dependence into the realm of spiritual freedom. 
Powerfully moved by the beauty of form in the works of 
antiquity, he taught that the production of ideal Nature,
of Nature elevated above the Actual, together with the 
expression of spiritual conceptions, is the highest aim 
of Art. 