But if we examine in what sense this surpassing of the 
Actual by Art has been understood by the most, it turns 
out that, with this view also, the notion of Nature as mere 
product, of things as a lifeless result, still continued; and 
the idea of a living creative Nature was in no wise awakened by it.
 Thus these ideal forms also could be animated by no positive insight into their nature; and if the 
forms of the Actual were dead for the dead beholder, these 
were not less so. Were no independent production of the 
Actual possible, neither would there be of the Ideal. The 
object of the imitation was changed ; the imitation remained. 
In the place of Nature were substituted the sublime works of 
Antiquity, whose outward forms the pupils busied themselves in imitating, but without the spirit that fills them. 
These forms, however, are as unapproachable, nay, more so, 
than the works of Nature, and leave us yet colder if we 
bring not to them the spiritual eye to penetrate through the 
veil and feel the stirring energy within. 

On the other hand, artists, since that time, have indeed 
received a certain ideal impetus, and notions of a beauty 
superior to matter; but these notions were like fair words, 
to which the deeds do not correspond. While the previous 
method in Art produced bodies without soul, this view 
taught only the secret of the soul, but not that of the body. 
The theory had, as usual, passed with one hasty stride to 
the opposite extreme; but the vital mean it had not yet 
found. 

Who can say that Winckelmann had not penetrated into 
the highest beauty? But with him it appeared in its dissevered elements only: on the one side as beauty in idea, 
and flowing out from the soul; on the other, as beauty of 
forms. 

But what is the efficient link that connects the two? Or 
by what power is the soul created together with the body, 
at once and as if with one breath? If this lies not within
the power of Art, as of Nature, then it can create nothing 
whatever. This vital connecting link, Winckelmann did not 
determine ; he did not teach how, from the idea, forms can 
be produced. Thus Art went over to that method which 
we W'Ould call the retrograde, since it strives from the 
form to come at the essence. But not thus is the Unlimited 
reached; it is not attainable by mere enhancement of the 
Limited. Hence, such works as have had their beginning 
in form, with all elaborateness on that side, show, in token 
of their origin, an incurable want at the very point where 
we expect the consummate, the essential, the final. The 
miracle by which the Limited should be raised to the Unlimited, the human become divine, is wanting ; the magic circle 
is drawn, but the spirit that it should inclose, appears not, 
being disobedient to the call of him who thought a creation 
possible through mere form. 

Nature meets us everywhere, at first with reserve, and 
in form more or less severe. She is like that quiet and 
serious beauty, that excites not attention by noisy advertisement, nor attracts the vulgar gaze. 

How can we, as it were, spiritually melt this apparently 
rigid form, so that the pure energy of things may flow 
together with the force of our spirit and both become one 
united mold? We must transcend Form, in order to gain 
it again as intelligible, living, and truly felt. Consider the 
most beautiful forms; what remains behind after you 
have abstracted from them the creative principle within? 
Nothing but mere unessential qualities, such as extension 
and the relations of space. Does the fact that one portion 
of matter exists near another, and distinct from it, contribute anything to its inner essence ? or does it not rather 
contribute nothing? Evidently the latter. It is not mere 
contiguous existence, but the manner of it, that makes 
form ;