Not only, however, as active principle, but as spirit and 
effective science, must the essence appear to us in the form, 
in order that we may truly apprehend it. For all unity 
must be spiritual in nature and origin ; and what is the aim 
of all investigation of Nature but to find science therein? 
For that wherein there is no Understanding cannot be 
the object of Understanding; the Unknowing cannot be 
known. The science by which Nature works is not, however, like human science, connected with reflection upon 
itself; in it, the conception is not separate from the act, 
nor the design from the execution. Therefore, rude matter 
strives, as it were, blindly, after regular shape, and unknowingly assumes pure stereometric forms, which belong, 
nevertheless, to the realm of ideas, and are something 
spiritual in the material. 

The sublimest arithmetic and geometry are innate in the 
stars, and unconsciously displayed by them in their motions. 
More distinctly, but still beyond their grasp, the living 
cognition appears in animals ; and thus we see them, though 
wandering about without reflection, bring about innumerable results far more excellent than themselves: the bird 
that, intoxicated with music, transcends itself in soul-like 
tones; the little artistic creature, that, without practise 
or instruction, accomplishes light works of architecture; 
but all directed by an overpowering spirit, that lightens 
in them already with single flashes of knowledge, but as yet 
appears nowhere as the full sun, as in Man. 

This formative science in Nature and Art is the link that 
connects idea and form, body and soul. Before everything 
stands an eternal idea, formed in the Infinite Understanding; but by what means does this idea pass into actuality 
and embodiment? Only through the creative science that
is as necessarily connected with the Infinite Understanding, 
as in the artist the principle that seizes the idea of insensuous Beauty is linked with that which sets it forth to the 
senses. 

If that artist be called happy and praiseworthy before 
all to whom the gods have granted this creative spirit, 
then that work of art will appear excellent which shows to 
us, as in outline, this unadulterated energy of creation and 
activity of Nature. 

It was long ago perceived that, in Art, not everything 
is performed with consciousness ; that, with the conscious 
activity, an unconscious action must combine; arid that it 
is of the perfect unity and mutual interpenetration of the 
two that the highest in Art is born. 

Works that want this seal of unconscious science are 
recognized by the evident absence of life self-supported 
and independent of the producer ; as, on the contrary, where 
this acts, Art imparts to its work, together with the utmost 
clearness to the understanding, that unfathomable reality 
wherein it resembles a work of Nature. 