It has often been attempted to make clear the position of 
the artist in regard to Nature, by saying that Art, in order 
to be such, must first withdraw itself from Nature, and 
return to it only in the final perfection. The true sense 
of this saying, it seems to us, can be no other than this — 
that in all things in Nature, the living idea shows itself 
only blindly active; were it so also in the artist, he would 
be in nothing distinct from Nature. But, should he attempt 
consciously to subordinate himself altogether to the Actual, 
and render with servile fidelity the already existing, he 
would produce larvce, but no works of Art. He must therefore withdraw himself from the product, from the creature, 
but only in order to raise himself to the creative energy, 
spiritually seizing the same. Thus he ascends into the 
realm of pure ideas ; he forsakes the creature, to regain it 
with thousandfold interest, and in this sense certainly to 
return to Nature. This spirit of Nature working at the
core of things, and speaking through form and shape as by 
symbols only, the artist must certainly follow with emulation ; and only so far as he seizes this with genial imitation 
has he himself produced anything genuine. For works 
produced by aggregation, even of forms beautiful in themselves, would still be destitute of all beauty, since that, 
through which the work on the whole is truly beautiful, cannot be mere form. It is above form — it is Essence, the 
Universal, the look and expression of the indwelling spirit 
of Nature. 

Now it can scarcely be doubtful what is to be thought 
of the so-called idealizing of Nature in Art, so universally 
demanded. This demand seems to arise from a way of 
thinking, according to which not Truth, Beauty, Goodness, 
but the contrary of all these, is the Actual. Were the 
Actual indeed opposed to Truth and Beauty, it would be 
necessary for the artist, not to elevate or idealize it, but 
to get rid of and destroy it, in order to create something 
true and beautiful. But how should it be possible for anything to be actual except the True ; and what is Beauty, if 
not full, complete Being? 

What higher aim, therefore, could Art have, than to rep- 
resent that which in Nature actually isl Or how should it 
undertake to excel so-called actual Nature, since it must 
always fall short of it? 

For does Art impart to its works actual, sensuous life? 
This statue breathes not, is stirred by no pulsation, warmed 
by no blood. 

But both the pretended excelling and the apparent falling 
short show themselves as the consequences of one and the 
same principle, as soon as we place the aim of Art in the 
exhibiting of that which truly is.