Only on the surface have its works the appearance of 
life ; in Nature, life seems to reach deeper, and to be wedded 
entirely with matter. But does not the continual mutation of matter and the universal lot of final dissolution 
teach us the unessential character of this union, and that
it is no intimate fusion? Art, accordingly, in the merely 
superficial animation of its works, but represents Nothingness as non-existing. 

How comes it that, to every tolerably cultivated taste, 
imitations of the so-called Actual, even though carried to 
deception, appear in the last degree untrue — nay, produce 
the impression of spectres; whilst a work in which the 
idea is predominant strikes us with the full force of truth, 
conveying us then only to the genuinely actual world? 
Whence comes it, if not from the more or less obscure feeling which tells us that the idea alone is the living principle 
in things, but all else unessential and vain shadow? 

On the same ground may be explained all the opposite 
cases which are brought up as instances of the surpassing 
of Nature by Art. In arresting the rapid course of himian 
years; in uniting the energy of developed manhood with 
the soft charm of early youth; or exhibiting a mother of 
grown-up sons and daughters in the full possession of 
vigorous beauty — what does Art except to annul what is 
unessential, Time? 

If, according to the remark of a discerning critic, every 
growth in Nature has but an instant of truly complete 
beauty, w^e may also say that it has, too, only an instant of 
full existence. In this instant it is what it is in all eternity; 
besides this, it has only a coming into and a passing out of 
existence. Art, in representing the thing at that instant, 
removes it out of Time, and sets it forth in its pure Being, 
in the eternity of its life. 

After everything positive and essential had once been 
abstracted from Form, it necessarily appeared restrictive, 
and, as it were, hostile, to the Essence ; and the same theory 
that had reproduced the false and powerless Ideal, necessarily tended to the formless in Art. Form would indeed 
be a limitation of the Essence if it existed independent of 
it. But if it exists with and by means of the Essence, how 
could this feel itself limited by that which it has itself 
created? Violence would indeed be done it by a form 
forced upon it, but never by one proceeding from itself.