In this, on the contrary, it must rest contented, and feel its 
own existence to be perfect and complete. 

Determinateness of form is in Nature never a negation, 
but ever an affirmation. Commonly, indeed, the shape of 
a body seems a confinement ; but could we behold the creative energy it would reveal itself as the measure that this 
energy imposes upon itself, and in which it shows itself a 
truly intelligent force; for in everything is the power of 
self-rule allowed to be an excellence, and one of the highest. 

In like manner most persons consider the particular in 
a negative manner — i. e., as that which is not the whole 
or all. Yet no particular exists by means of its limitation, 
but through the indwelling force with which it maintains 
itself as a particular Whole, in distinction from the 
Universe. 

This force of particularity, and thus also of individuality, 
showing itself as vital character, the negative conception 
of it is necessarily followed by an unsatisfying and false 
view of the characteristic in Art. Lifeless and of intolerable hardness would be the Art that should aim to exhibit 
the empty shell or limitation of the Individual. Certainly 
we desire to see not merely the individual, but, more than 
this, its vital Idea. But if the artist has seized the inward 
creative spirit and essence of the Idea, and sets this forth, 
he makes the individual a world in itself, a class, an eternal 
prototype ; and he who has grasped the essential character 
needs not to fear hardness and severity, for these are the 
conditions of life. Nature, that in her completeness appears as the utmost benignity, we see, in each particular, 
aiming even primarily and principally at severity, seclusion 
and reserve. As the whole creation is the work of the 
utmost externization and renunciation [Entdusserung], so 
the artist must first deny himself and descend into the Particular, without shunning isolation, nor the pain, the 
anguish of Form. 

Nature, from her first works, is throughout characteristic ; the energy of fire, the splendor of light, she shuts up
in hard stone, the tender soul of melody in severe metal; 
even on the threshold of Life, and already meditating 
organic shape, she sinks back overpowered by the might of 
Form, into petrifaction. 
The life of the plant consists in still receptivity, but in 
what exact and severe outline is this passive life inclosed! 
In the animal kingdom the strife between Life and Form 
seems first properly to begin ; her first works Nature hides 
in hard shells, and, where these are laid aside, the animated 
world attaches itself again through its constructive impulse 
to the realm of crystallization. Finally she comes forward 
more boldly and freely, and vital, important characteristics 
show themselves, being the same through whole classes. 
Art, however, cannot begin so far down as Nature. Though 
Beauty is spread everywhere, yet there are various grades 
in the appearance and unfolding of the Essence, and thus 
of Beauty. But Art demands a certain fulness, and desires 
not to strike a single note or tone, nor even a detached 
accord, but at once the full symphony of Beauty. 