Art, therefore, prefers to grasp immediately at the 
highest and most developed, the human form. For since 
it is not given it to embrace the immeasurable whole, and 
as in all other creatures only single fulgurations, in Man 
alone full entire Being appears without abatement, Art is 
not only permitted but required to see the sum of Nature 
in Man alone. But precisely on this account — that she 
here assembles all in one point — Nature repeats her whole 
multiformity, and pursues again in a narrower compass 
the same course that she had gone through in her wide 
circuit. 

Here, therefore, arises the demand upon the artist first 
to be true and faithful in detail, in order to come forth 
complete and beautiful in the whole. Here he must wrestle 
with the creative spirit of Nature (which in the human 
world also deals out character and stamp in endless 
variety), not in weak and effeminate, but stout and courageous conflict.
Persevering exercise in the study of that by virtue of 
which the characteristic in things is a positive principle, 
must preserve him from emptiness, weakness, inward inanity, before he can venture to aim, by ever higher combination and final melting together of manifold forms, to 
reach the extremest beauty in works uniting the highest 
simplicity with infinite meaning. 

Only through the perfection of form can Form be made 
to disappear; and this is certainly the final aim of Art in 
the Characteristic. But as the apparent harmony that is 
even more easily reached by the empty and frivolous than 
by others, is yet inwardly vain; so in Art the quickly 
attained harmony of the exterior, without inward fulness. 
And if it is the part of theory and instruction to oppose the 
spiritless copying of beautiful forms, especially must they 
oppose the tendency toward an effeminate characterless 
Art, which gives itself, indeed, higher names, but therewith 
only seeks to hide its incapacity to fulfil the fundamental 
conditions. 

That lofty Beauty in which the fulness of form causes 
Form itself to disappear, was adopted by the modem 
theory of Art, after Winckelmann, not only as the highest, 
but as the only standard. But as the deep foundation upon 
which it rests was overlooked, it resulted that a negative 
conception was formed even of that which is the sum of all 
affirmation. 

Winckelmann compares Beauty with water drawn from 
the bosom of the spring, which, the less taste it has, the 
whole somer it is esteemed. It is true that the highest 
Beauty is characterless, but so we say of the Universe 
that it has no determinate dimension, neither length, 
breadth nor depth, since it has all in equal infinity; or 
that the Art of creative Nature is formless, because she 
herself is subjected to no form.