In this and in no other sense can we say that Grecian art 
in its highest development rises into the characterless ; but 
it did not aim immediately at this. It was from the bonds
of Nature that it struggled upward to divine freedom. 
From no lightly scattered seed, but only from a deeply 
infolded kernel, could this heroic growth spring up. Only 
mighty emotions, only a deep stirring of the fancy through 
the impression of all-enlivening, all-commanding energies 
of Nature, could stamp upon Art that invincible vigor with 
which from the rigid, secluded earnestness of earlier productions up to the period of works overflowing with sensuous grace, it ever remained faithful to truth, and produced 
the highest spiritual Reality which it is given to mortals 
to behold. 

In like manner, as their Tragedy commences with the 
grandest characteristicness in morals, so the beginning of 
their Plastic Art was the earnestness of Nature, and the 
stern goddess of Athens its first and only Muse. 

This epoch is marked by that style which Winckelmann 
describes as the still harsh and severe, from which the next 
or lofty style was able to develop itself by the mere enhancement of the Characteristic into the Sublime and the Simple. 

For in the statues of the most perfect or divine natures 
not only all the complexity of form of which human nature 
is capable had to be united, but moreover the union must 
be such as may be conceived to exist in the system of the 
Universe itself — the lower forais, or those relating to 
inferior attributes, being comprehended under higher, and 
all at last under one supreme form, in which they indeed 
extingniish one another as separately existing, but still continue in Essence and efficiency. 

Thus, though we cannot call this high and self-sufficing 
Beauty characteristic, so far as herewith is connected the 
notion of limitation or conditionality in the manifestation, 
yet still the characteristic continues efficient, though indistinguishable, mthin; as in the crystal, although transparent, the texture nevertheless remains; each characteristic element has its weight, however slight, and helps to 
bring about the sublime equipoise of Beauty.
The outer side or basis of all Beauty is beauty of form. 
But as Form cannot exist without Essence, wherever Form 
is, there also is Character, whether in visible presence or 
only perceptible in its effects. Characteristic Beauty, 
therefore, is Beauty in the root, from which alone Beauty 
can arise as the fruit. Essence may, indeed, outgrow 
Form, but even then the Characteristic remains as the still 
efficient groundwork of the Beautiful. 