That most excellent critic, to whom the gods have given 
sway over Nature as well as Art, compares the Characteristic in its relation to Beauty, with the skeleton in its relation to the living form. Were we to interpret this striking 
simile in our sense, we should say that the skeleton, in 
Nature, is not, as in our thought, detached from the living 
whole ; that the firm and the yielding, the determining and 
the determined, mutually presuppose each other, and can 
exist only together; thus that the vitally Characteristic is 
already the whole form, the result of the action and reaction 
of bone and flesh, of Active and Passive. And although 
Art, like Nature, in its higher developments, thrusts inward 
the previously visible skeleton, yet the latter can never 
be opposed to Shape and Beauty, since it has always a 
determining share in the iDroduction of the one as well as 
of the other. 

But whether that high and independent Beauty should 
be the only standard in Art, as it is the highest, seems to 
depend on the degree of fulness and extent that belongs 
to the particular Art. 

Nature, in her wide circumference, ever exhibits the 
higher with the lower; creating in Man the godlike, she 
elaborates in all her other productions only its material 
and foundation, which must exist in order that in contrast with it the Essence as such may appear. And even 
in the higher world of Man the great mass serves again 
as the basis upon which the godlike that is preserved 
pure in the few, manifests itself in legislation, government, 
and the establishment of Religion. So that wherever Art 
works with more of the complexity of Nature, it may and 
must display, together mth the highest measure of Beauty, 
also its groundwork and raw material, as it were, in distinct 
appropriate forms. 

Here first prominently unfolds itself the difference in 
Nature of the forms of Art. 

Plastic Art, in the more exact sense of the term, disdains to give Space outwardly to the object, but bears it 
within itself. This, however, narrows its field; it is compelled, indeed, to display the beauty of the Universe almost 
in a single point. It must therefore aim immediately at 
the highest, and can attain complexity only separately and 
in the strictest exclusion of all conflicting elements. By 
isolating the purely animal in human nature it succeeds 
in forming inferior creations too, harmonious and even 
beautiful, as we are taught by the beauty of numerous 
Fauns preserved from antiquity; yea, it can, parodying 
itself like the merry spirit of Nature, reverse its own Ideal, 
and, for instance, in the extravagance of the Silenic figures, 
by light and sportive treatment appear freed again from 
the pressure of matter. 

But in all cases it is compelled strictly to isolate the 
work, in order to make it self-consistent and a world in 
itself; since for this form of Art there is no higher unity, 
in which the dissonance of particulars should be melted 
into harmony. 

Painting, on the contrary, in the very extent of its sphere, 
can better measure itself with the Universe, and create with 
epic profusion. In an Iliad there is room even for a Thersites; and what does not find a place in the great epic of 
Nature and History ! 