In old times, when wishing still helped one, there 
lived a king whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful that 
the sun itself, which has seen so much, was 
astonished whenever it shone in her face. 
Close by the King's castle lay a great dark forest, and 
under an old lime-tree in the forest was a well, and when 
the day was warm the King's child went out into the forest 
and sat down by the side of the cool fountain, and when she 
was dull she took a golden ball and threw it up high and 
caught it, and this ball was her favorite plaything. 

Now it so happened that, on one occasion, the princess' 
golden ball did not fall into the little hand which she was 
holding up for it, but onto the ground beyond, and rolled 
straight into the water. The King's daughter followed it 
with her eyes, but it vanished, and the well was deep — 
so deep that the bottom could not be seen. On this she 
began to cry, and cried louder and louder, and could not be 
comforted. And as she thus lamented, some one said to 
her: " What ails thee, King's daughter! Thou weepest 
so that even a stone would show pity. " She looked around 
to the side from whence the voice came, and saw a frog 
stretching forth its thick, ugly head from the water. "Ah ! 
old water-splasher, is it thou? " asked she; " I am weeping 
for my golden ball, which has fallen into the well." 
 Be quiet, and do not weep, " answered the frog ; " I can 
help thee ; but what wilt thou give me if I bring thy play-thing up again ? " " Whatever thou wilt have, dear frog, " 
said she — " my clothes, my pearls and jewels, and even the 
golden crowm which lam wearing. " 

The frog answered, " I do not care for thy clothes, thy 
pearls and jewels, or thy golden crown, but if thou wilt 
love me and let me be thy companion and play-fellow, and 
sit by thee at thy little table, and eat off thy little golden 
plate, and drink out of thy little cup, and sleep in thy little 
bed — if thou wilt promise me this I will go down below 
and bring thee thy golden ball again." 

" Oh, yes, " said she, " I promise thee all thou wishest, 
if thou wilt but bring me my ball back again. " She, however, thought, " How the silly frog does talk ! He lives 
in the water with the other frogs and croaks, and can be no 
companion to any human being! " 

But the frog, when he had received this promise, put his 
head into the water and sank down, and in a short time 
came swimming up again with the ball in his mouth, and 
threw it on the grass. The King's daughter was delighted 
to see her pretty plaything once more, and picked it up, 
and ran away with it. " Wait, wait, " said the frog ; " take 
me with thee; I can't run as thou canst." But what did 
it avail him to scream his croak, croak, after her, as loudly 
as he could? She did not listen to it, but ran home and 
soon forgot the poor frog, who was forced to go back into 
his well again. 