The next day, when she had seated herself at the table 
with the King and all the courtiers and was eating from 
her little golden plate, something came creeping splish 
splash, splish splash, up the marble staircase, and when it 
had got to the top, it knocked at the door and cried, " Princess, youngest princess, open the door for me." She ran 
to see who was outside, but when she opened the door, there 
sat the frog in front of it. Then she slammed the door to, 
in great haste, sat down to dinner again, and was quite 
frightened. The King saw plainly that her heart was beating violently, and said, " My child, what art thou so afraid 
off Is there perchance a giant outside who wants to carry 
thee away? " "Ah, no," replied she, " it is no giant, but 
a disgusting frog." 

" What does the frog want with thee ? " " Ah, dear 
father, yesterday when I was in the forest sitting by the 
well, playing, my golden ball fell into the water. And 
because I cried so the frog brought it out again for me, and 
because he insisted so on it, I promised him he should be 
my companion; but I never thought he would be able to 
come out of his water ! And now he is outside there, and 
wants to come in to me." 

In the meantime it knocked a second time, and cried : 

" Princess ! youngest princess ! 
Open the door for me! 

Dost thou not know what thou saidst to me 
Yesterday by the cool waters of the fountain? 
Princess, youngest princess! 
Open the door for me ! " 

Then said the King, " That which thou has promised 
must thou perform. Go and let him in." She went and 
opened the door, and the frog hopped in and followed her, 
step by step, to her chair. There he sat still and cried, 
" Lift me up beside thee." She delayed, until at last the 
King commanded her to do it. When the frog was once on 
the chair he wanted to be on the table, and when he was on 
the table he said, " Now, push thy little golden plate nearer 
to me that we may eat together. " She did this, but it was 
easy to see that she did not do it willingly. The frog 
enjoyed what he ate, but almost every mouthful she took 
choked her. At length he said, "I have eaten and am 
satisfied ; now I am tired, carry me into thy little room and 
make thy little silken bed ready, and we will both lie down 
and go to sleep." 