There was once on a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and she loved them with all the love of a mother 
for her children. One day she wanted to go into the forest 
and fetch some food. So she called all seven to her 
and said, " Dear children, I have to go into the forest; be 
on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will 
devour you all — skin, hair, and everything. The wretch 
often disguises himself, but you will know him at once by 
his rough voice and his black feet. " The kids said, " Dear 
mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go 
away without any anxiety. " Then the old one bleated and 
went on her way with an easy mind. 

It was not long before some one knocked at the house 
door, and cried, " Open the door, dear children ; your 
mother is here, and has brought something back with her 
for each of you. " But the little kids knew that it was the 
wolf, by the rough voice. " We will not open the door," 
cried they; " thou art not our mother. She has a soft, 
pleasant voice, but thy voice is rough ; thou art the wolf ! " 
Then the wolf went away to a shopkeeper and bought him- 
self a great lump of chalk, ate this, and made his voice soft 
with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the 
house, and cried, " Open the door, dear children; your 
mother is here and has brought something back with her 
for each of you." But the wolf had laid his black paws 
against the window, and the children saw them and cried, 
" We will not open the door ; our mother has not black feet 
like thee ; thou art the wolf ! " Then the wolf ran to a 
baker and said, " I have hurt my feet, rub some dough over 
them for me." And when the baker had rubbed his feet 
over, he ran to the miller and said, " Strew some white 
meal over my feet for me. " The miller thought to himself, 
" The wolf wants to deceive some one," and refused; but 
the wolf said, " If thou wilt not do it, I will devour thee. " 
Then the miller was afraid, and made his paws white for 
him. Truly men are like that.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house 
door, knocked at it, and said, " Open the door for me, children; your dear little mother has come home, and has 
brought every one of you something back from the forest 
with her. " The little kids cried, " First show us thy paws 
that we may know if thou art our dear little mother." 
Then he put his paws in through the window, and when the 
kids saw that they were white, they believed that all he 
said was true, and opened the door. But who should come 
in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide 
themselves. One sprang under the table, the second into 
the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, 
the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But the wolf 
found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the 
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest 
in the clock-case was the only one he did not find. When 
the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid 
himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and 
went to sleep. Soon afterward the old goat came home 
again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw there! 
The house door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and 
benches were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to 
pieces, and the quilts and pillows were pulled off the bed. 
She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found. 
She called them one after another by name, but no one 
answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft 
voice cried, " Dear mother, I am in the clock-case." She 
took the kid out, and it told her that the wolf had come and 
had eaten all the others. Then you may imagine how she 
wept over her poor children. 