At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest 
kid ran with her. When they came to the meadow, there 
lay the wolf by the tree snoring so loud that the branches 
shook. She looked at him on every side and saw that 
something was moving and struggling in his gorged body. 
"Ah, heavens!" said she, "is it possible that my poor 
children, whom he has swallowed down for his supper, can
be still alive? " Then the kid had to run home and fetch 
scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut open 
the monster's stomach. Hardly had she made one cut than 
one little kid thrust its head out; and, when she had cut 
further, all six sprang out one after another. They were 
all still alive and had suffered no injury whatever, for in 
his greediness the monster had swallowed them down whole. 
What rejoicing there was I Then they embraced their dear 
mother, and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The 
mother, however, said, " Now go and look for some big 
stones, and we will fill the wicked beast's stomach with 
them while he is still asleep. " Then the seven kids dragged 
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them 
into his stomach as they could get in ; and the mother sewed 
him up again in the greatest haste, so that he was not aware 
of an5i;hing, and never once stirred. 

When the wolf at length had had his sleep out, he got 
on his legs, and, as the stones in his stomach made him very 
thirsty, he wanted to go to a well to drink. But when he 
began to walk and to move about, the stones in his stomach 
knocked against one another and rattled. Then cried he — 

" Wtat rumbles and tumbles 
Against my poor bones f 
I thought 'twas six kids, 
But it's naught but big stones." 

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water 
and was just about to drink, the heavy stones made him fall 
in and there was no help, but he had to drown miserably. 
When the seven kids saw that, they came running to the 
spot, and cried aloud, " The wolf is dead! The wolf is 
dead ! " and danced for joy round about the well with their 
mother. 