Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with 
his wife and his two children. The boy was called Haensel 
and the girl Grethel. He had little to bite and to break, and 
once, when great scarcity fell on the land, he could no 
longer procure daily bread. Now when he thought over 
this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety,
he groaned and said to his wife, " What is to become of us ? 
How are we to feed our poor children when we no longer 
have anything even for ourselves? " "I'll tell you what, 
husband," answered the woman, "early tomorrow morn- 
ing we will take the children out into the forest to where it 
is the thickest, and there we will light a fire for them, and 
give each of them one piece of bread more ; then we will go 
to our work and leave them alone. They will not find the 
way home again, and we shall be rid of them." "No, 
wife, " said the man, " I will not do that ; how can I bear 
to leave my children alone in the forest? The wild animals 
would soon come and tear them to pieces." " 0, thou 
fool ! " said she, " then we must all four die of hunger and 
thou mayest as well plane the planks for our cofiins ; " and 
she left him no peace until he consented. " But I feel very 
sorry for the poor children, all the same, " said the man. 

The two children had also not been able to sleep for 
hunger, and had heard what their step-mother had said to 
their father. Grethel wept bitter tears, and said to Haen- 
sel, " Now all is over with us." "Be quiet, Grethel," said 
Haensel. " Do not distress thyself, I will soon find a way 
to help us." And when the old folks had fallen asleep, 
he got up, put on his coat, opened the door below, and crept 
outside. The moon shone brightly and the white pebbles 
which lay in front of the house glittered like real silver 
pennies. Haensel stooped and put as many of them in the 
little pocket of his coat as he could possibly get in. Then 
he went back and said to Grethel, "Be comforted, dear 
little sister, and sleep in peace ; God will not forsake us ; " 
and he lay down again in his bed. When day dawned, but 
before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the 
two children, saying, " Get up, you sluggards ! we are going 
into the forest to fetch wood." She gave each a little piece 
of bread, and said, " There is something for your dinner, 
but do not eat it up before then, for you will get nothing 
else. " Grethel took the bread under her apron, as Haensel 
had the stones in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short 
time, Haensel stood still and peeped back at the house, and 
did so again and again. His father said, " Haensel, what 
art thou looking at there and staying behind for! Mind 
what thou art about, and do not forget how to use thy legs." 
"Ah, father," said Haensel, " I am looking at my little 
white cat, which is sitting upon the roof, and wants to say 
good-bye to me." The wife said, " Fool, that is not thy 
little cat; that is the morning sun which is shining on the 
chimneys. " Haensel, however, had not been looking back 
at the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the 
white pebble-stones out of his pocket on the road. 

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the 
father said, " Now, children, pile up some wood, and I will 
light a fire that you may not be cold." Haensel and 
Grethel gathered brushwood together, as high as a little 
hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames 
were burning very high the woman said, " Now, children, 
lay yourselves down by the fire and rest and we will go into 
the forest and cut some wood. When we have done, we will 
come back and fetch you away." 