Haensel and Grethel sat by the fire, and, when noon came, 
each ate a little piece of bread, but, as they heard the 
strokes of the wood-axe, they believed that their father was 
near. It was, however, not the axe ; it was a branch which 
he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was 
blowing backward and forward ; and, as they had been sitting such a long time, their eyes shut with fatigue and they 
fell fast asleep. When at last they awoke it was already 
dark night. Grethel began to cry and said, " How are we 
to get out of the forest now? " But Haensel comforted 
her and said, " Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, 
and then we will soon find the way." And when the full 
moon had risen, Haensel took his little sister by the hand 
and followed the pebbles, which shone like newly-coined 
silver pieces and showed them the way. 

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day
came once more to their father's house. They knocked at 
the door, and when the woman opened it and saw that it 
was Haensel and Grethel, she said, " You naughty children, 
why have you slept so long in the forest? We thought you 
were never coming back at all ! " The father, however, 
rejoiced, for it had cut him to the heart to leave them 
behind alone. 

Not long afterward, there was once more great scarcity 
in all parts, and the children heard their mother saying at 
night to their father, " Everything is eaten again; we have 
one-half loaf left, and after that there is an end. The 
children must go. We will take them farther into the wood, 
so that they will not find their way out again; there is no 
other means of saving ourselves ! " The man 's heart was 
heavy, and he thought, " It would be better for thee to 
share the last mouthful with thy children." The woman, 
however, would listen to nothing that he had to say, but 
scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B 
likewise, and, as he had yielded the first time, he had to do 
so a second time also. 

The children were, however, still awake and had heard 
the conversation. When the old folks were asleep, Haensel 
again got up, and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles; 
but the woman had locked the door, and Haensel could not 
get out. Nevertheless he comforted his little sister, and 
said, " Do not cry, Grethel, go to sleep quietly. The good 
God will help us." 

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the 
children out of their beds. Their bit of bread was given 
to them, but it was still smaller than the time before. On 
the way into the forest Haensel crumbled his in his pocket, 
and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground. 
" Haensel, why dost thou stop and look around? " asked the 
father ; " go on. " " I am looking back at my little pigeon 
which is sitting on the roof, and wants to say good-bye to 
me," answered Haensel. " Simpleton! " said the woman, 
" that is not thy little pigeon, that is the morning sun that
is shining on the chimney." Haensel, however, little by 
little, threw all the crumbs on the path. 