The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, 
where they had never in their lives been before. Then a 
great fire was again made, and the mother said, " Just sit 
there, you children, and when you are tired you may sleep 
a little ; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in the 
evening, when we are done, we will come and fetch you 
away." When it was noon, Grethel shared her piece of 
bread with Haensel, who had scattered his by the way. 
Then they fell asleep and evening came and went, but no 
one came to the poor children. They did not awate until 
it was dark night; but Haensel comforted his little sister 
and said, " Just wait, Grethel, until the moon rises, and 
then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have strewn 
about. They will show us our way home again." When 
the moon rose they set out, but they found no crumbs, for 
the many thousands of birds which fly about in the woods 
and fields had picked them all up. Haensel said to Grethel, 
" We shall soon find the way," but they did not find it. 
They walked the whole night and all the next day too, from 
morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest, 
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two 
or three berries which grew on the ground. And as they 
were so weary that their legs would carry them no longer, 
they lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep. 

It was now three mornings since they had left their
father's house. They began to walk again, but they always 
got so much deeper into the forest that, if help did not come 
soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it was 
mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a 
bough, which sang so delightfully that they stood still and 
listened to it. And when it had finished its song, it spread 
its wings and flew away before them, and they followed it 
until they reached a little house, on the roof of which it 
alighted; and when thej^ came quite up to the little house 
they saw that it was built of bread and covered with cakes,
and that the windows were of clear sugar. " We will set 
to work on that," said Haensel, " and have a good meal. 
I will eat a bit of the roof, and thou, Grethel, canst eat 
some of the window; it will taste sweet." Haensel reached 
up above, and broke off a little of the roof to try how it 
tasted, and Grethel leant against the window and nibbled 
at the panes. Then a soft voice cried from the room — 

" Nibble, nibble, gnaw. 
Who is nibbling at my little house ? " 

The children answered — 

" The wind, the wind, 
The heaven-bom wind," 

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. 

Haensel, who thought the roof tasted very nice, tore down 
a great piece of it, and Grethel pushed out the whole of one 
round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with it. 
Suddenly the door opened, and a very, very old woman, who 
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Haensel 
and Grethel were so terribly frightened that they let fall 
what they had in their hands. The old woman, however, 
nodded her head, and said, " Oh, you dear children, who 
has brought you here? Do come in, and stay with me. 
No harm shall happen to you." She took them both by 
the hand, and led them into her little house. Then good 
food was set before them, milk and pancakes, with sugar, 
apples, and nuts. Afterward two pretty little beds were 
covered with clean white linen, and Haensel and Grethel 
lay down in them, and thought they were in heaven. 

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind ; she was 
in reality a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and 
had only built the little bread house in order to entice them 
there. When a child fell into her power, she killed it, 
cooked and ate it, and that was a feast day with her. 