The wheel of my father's mill was once more 
turning and whirring merrily, the melting 
snow _trickled. steadily from the roof, the 
sparrows chirped and hopped about, as I, 
taking great delight in the warm sunshine, 
sat on the door-step and rubbed my eyes to rid them of 
sleep. Then my father made his appearance ; he had been 
busy in the mill since daybreak, and his nightcap was all 
awry as he said to me — 

" You Good-for-nothing ! There you sit sunning yourself, and stretching yourself till your bones crack, leaving 
me to do all the work alone. I can keep you here no longer. 
Spring is at hand. Off with you into the world and earn 
your own bread ! " 

" Well, " said I, " all right ; if I am a Good-for-nothing, 
I will go forth into the world and make my fortune." In 
fact, I was very glad to have my father speak thus, for I 
myself had been thinking of starting on my travels; the 
yellow-hammer, which all through the autumn and winter 
had been chii^ping sadly at our window, " Farmer, hire me ; 
farmer, hire me," was, now that the lovely spring weather 
had set in, once more piping cheerily from the old tree, 
" Farmer, nobody wants your work." So I went into the 
house and took down from the wall my fiddle, on which I 
could play quite skilfully ; my father gave me a few pieces 
of money to set me on my way ; and I sauntered off along 
the village street. I was filled with secret joy as I saw all 
my old acquaintances and comrades right and left going 
to their work digging and ploughing, just as they had done 
yesterday and the day before, and so on, whilst I was roaming out into the wide world. I called out " Good-by! " to 
the poor people on all sides, but no one took much notice of 
me. A perpetual Sabbath seemed to reign in my soul, and 
when I got out among the fields I took out my dear fiddle 
and played and sang, as I walked along the country road — 

" The favored ones, the loved of Heaven, 
God sends to roam the world at will; 
His wonders to their gaze are given 
By field and forest, stream and hill. 

" The dullards who at home are staying 
Are not refreshed by morning's ray; 
They grovel, earth-bom calls obeying, 
And petty cares beset their day. 

" The little brooks o'er rocks are springing. 
The lark's gay carol fills the air; 
Why should not I with them be singing 
A joyous anthem free from care? 

" I wander on, in God confiding, 

For all are His, wood, field, and fell; 
O'er earth and skies He, still presiding. 
For me will order all things well." 