As I was looking around, a fine traveling-carriage drove 
along very near me; it had probably been just behind me 
for some time without my perceiving it, so filled with melody had I been, for it was going quite slowly, and two 
elegant ladies had their heads out of the window, listening. 
One was especially beautiful, and younger than the other, 
but both pleased me extremely. When I stopped singing 
the elder ordered the coachman to stop his horses, and 
accosted me with great condescension: "Aha, my merry 
lad, you know how to sing very pretty songs ! " I, nothing 
loath, replied, " Please Your Grace, I know some far prettier." "And where are you going so early in the morning? " she asked. I was ashamed to confess that I did not 
myself know, and so I said, boldly, " To Vienna. " The two 
ladies then talked together in a strange tongue which I did
not understand. The younger shook her head several times, 
but the other only laughed, and finally called to me, " Jump 
up behind ; we too are going to Vienna. " Who more ready 
than I! I made my best bow, and sprang up behind the 
carriage, the coachman cracked his whip, and away we 
bowled along the smooth road so swiftly that the wind 
whistled in my ears. 

Behind me vanished my native village with its gardens 
and church-tower, before me appeared fresh villages, 
castles, and mountains, beneath me on either side the 
meadows in the tender green of spring flew past, and above 
me countless larks were soaring in the blue air. I was 
ashamed to shout aloud, but I exulted inwardly, and shuffled 
about so on the foot-board behind the carriage that I 
well-nigh lost my fiddle from under my arm. But when the 
sun rose higher in the sky, while heavy, white, noonday 
clouds gathered on the horizon, and the air hung sultry 
and still above the gently-waving grain, I could not but 
remember my village and my father, and our mill, and how 
cool and comfortable it was beside the shady mill-pool, and 
how far, far away from me it all was. And the most curious 
sensation overcame me; I felt as if I must turn and run 
back ; but I stuck my fiddle between my coat and my vest, 
settled myself on the foot-board, and went to sleep. 

When I opened my eyes again, the carriage was standing 
beneath tall linden-trees, on the other side of which a broad 
flight of steps led between columns into a magnificent 
castle. Through the trees beyond I saw the towers of 
Vienna. The ladies, it appeared, had left the carriage, and 
the horses had been unharnessed. I was startled to find 
myself alone, and I hurried into the castle. As I did so I 
heard some one at a window above laughing. 