An odd time I had in this castle. First, as soon as I 
found myself in the cool, spacious vestibule, some one 
tapped me on the shoulder with a stick. I turned quickly 
about, and there stood a tall gentleman in state apparel, 
with a broad bandolier of silk and gold crossing his breast 
from his shoulder to his hip, a staff in his hand, gilded at
the top, and an extraordinarily large Roman nose; he 
strutted up to me, swelling like a ruffled-up turkey-cock, 
and asked me what I wanted there. I was taken entirely 
aback, and in my confusion was unable to utter a word. 
Several servants passed, going up and down the staircase ; 
they said nothing, but eyed me superciliously. Then a 
lady's-maid appeared; she came up to me, declared that I 
was a charming young fellow, and that her mistress had 
sent to ask me if I did not want a place as gardener's boy. 
I put my hand in my pocket — the few coins I had pos- 
sessed were gone. They must have been jerked out by my 
shuffling on the foot-board behind the carriage. I had 
nothing to depend upon save my skill with the fiddle, for 
which the gentleman with the staff, as he informed me in 
passing, would not give a farthing. Therefore, in my distress, I said " yes " to the maid, keeping my eyes fixed the 
w^hile upon the portentous figure pacing the hall to and 
fro like the pendulum of a clock in a church-tower, appearing from the background with imposing majesty and with 
unfailing regularity. At last a gardener came, muttering 
something about boors and vagabonds, and led me off to 
the garden, preaching me a long sermon on the way about 
my being diligent and industrious and never loitering about 
the world any more, and how, if I would give up all my idle 
and foolish ways, I might come to some good in the end. 
There was a great deal of exhortation in this strain, very 
good and useful, but I have since forgotten it nearly all. 
In fact, I really hardly know how it all came about ; I went 
on saying " yes " to everything, and I felt like a bird with 
its wings clipped. But, thank God, in the end I was earning 
my living ! 
I found life delightful in that garden. I had a hot dinner 
every day and plenty of it, and more money than I needed 
for my glass of wine, only, unfortunately, I had quite a deal 
to do. The pavilions, and arbors, and long green walks delighted me, if I could only have sauntered about and talked 
pleasantly like the gentlemen and ladies who came there 
every day. Whenever the gardener was away and I was 
alone, I took out my short tobacco-pipe, sat down, and 
thought of all the beautiful, polite things with which I 
could have entertained that lovely young lady who had 
brought me to the castle, had I been a cavalier walking 
beside her. Or on sultry afternoons I lay on my back on 
rhe grass, when all was so quiet that you could hear the 
bees humming, and I gazed up at the clouds sailing away 
toward my native village, and around me at the waving 
grass and flowers, and thought of the lovely lady; and it 
sometimes chanced that I really saw her in the distance 
walking in the garden, with her guitar or a book, tall and 
beautiful as an angel, and I was only half conscious 
whether I were awake or dreaming. 