Thus, once as I was passing a summer-house on my way 
to work, I was singing to myself — 

" I gaze around me, going. 
By forest, dale, and lea, 
O'er heights where streams are flowing, 
My every thought bestowing. 
Ah, Lady fair, on thee ! " — 

when, through the half-opened lattice of the cool, dark 
summer-house buried amid flowers, I saw the sparkle of a 
pair of beautiful, youthful eyes. I was so startled that I 
could not finish my song, but passed on to my work without 
looking round. 

In the evening — it was Saturday, and, in joyous anticipation of the coming Sunday, I was standing, fiddle in hand, 
at the window of the gardener's house, still thinking of the 
sparkling eyes — the lady's-maid came tripping through 
the twilight — " The gracious Lady fair sends you this to 
drink her health, and a ' Good-Night ' besides ! " And in 
a twinkling she put a flask of wine on the window-sill and 
vanished among the flowers and shrubs like a lizard. 

I stood looking at the wonderful flask for a long time, not 
knowing what to think. And if before I played the fiddle 
merrily, I now played it ten times more so, and I sang the 
song of the Lady fair all through, and all the other songs
that I knew, until the nightingales wakened outside and the 
moon and stars lit up the garden. Ah, that was a lovely 
night ! 

No cradle-song tells the child 's future ; a blind hen finds 
many a grain of wheat; he laughs best who laughs last; 
the unexpected often happens; man proposes, God disposes : thus did I meditate the next day, sitting in the gar-den with my pipe, and as I looked down at myself I seemed 
to myself to be a downright dunce. Contrary to all my 
habits hitherto, I now rose betimes every day, before the 
gardener and the other assistants were stirring. It was 
most beautiful then in the garden. The flowers, the fountains, the rose-bushes, the whole place, glittered in the morning sunshine like pure gold and jewels. And in the avenues 
of huge beeches it was as quiet, cool, and solemn as a church, 
only the little birds fluttered around and pecked in the 
gravel paths. In front of the castle, just under the windows, there was a large bush in full bloom. Thither I used 
to go in the early morning, and crouch down beneath the 
branches where I could watch the windows, for I had not 
the courage to appear in the open. Thence I sometimes saw 
the Lady fair in a snow-white robe come, still drowsy and 
warm, to the open window. She would stand there braiding 
her dark-brown hair, gazing abroad over the garden and 
shrubbery, or she would tend and water the flowers upon 
her window-sill, or would rest her guitar upon her white 
arm and sing out into the clear air so wondrously that to 
this day my heart faints with sadness when one of her 
songs recurs to me. And ah, it was all so long ago ! 

So my life passed for a week and more. But once — she 
was standing at the window and all was quiet around — a 
confounded fly flew directly up my nose, and I was seized 
with an interminable fit of sneezing. She leaned far out of 
the window and discovered me cowering in the shrubbery. 
I was overcome with mortification and did not go there 
again for many a day. 