At last I ventured to return to my post, but the window 
remained closed. I hid in the bushes for four, five, six
mornings, but she did not appear. Then I grew tired of 
my hiding-place and came out boldly, and every morning 
promenaded bravely beneath all the windows of the castle. 
But the lovely Lady fair was not to be seen. At a window 
a little farther on I saw the other lady standing; I had 
never before seen her so distinctly. She had a fine rosy 
face, and was plump, and as gorgeously attired as a tulip. 
I always made her a low bow, and she acknowledged it, and 
her eyes twinkled very kindly and courteously. Once only, 
I thought I saw the Lady fair standing behind the curtain 
at her window, peeping out. 

Many days passed and I did not see her, either in the 
garden or at the window. The gardener scolded me for 
laziness; I was out of humor, tired of myself and of all 
about me. 

I was lying on the grass one Sunday afternoon, watching 
the blue wreaths of smoke from my pipe, and fretting because I had not chosen some other trade which would not 
have bored me so day after day. The other fellows had all 
gone off to the dance in the neighboring village. Every one 
was strolling about in Sunday attire, the houses were gay, 
and there was melody in the very air. But I walked off and 
sat solitary, like a bittern among the reeds, by a lonely pond 
in the garden, rocking myself in a little skiff tied there, 
while the vesper bells sounded faintly from the town and 
the swans glided to and fro on the placid water. A sadness 
as of death possessed me. 

On a sudden I heard, in the distance, voices talking gaily, 
and bursts of merry laughter. They sounded nearer and 
nearer, and red and white kerchiefs and hats and feathers 
were visible through the shrubbery. A party of gentlemen 
and ladies were coming from the castle, across the meadow, 
directly toward me, and my two ladies among them. I 
stood up and was about to retire, when the elder perceived 
me. "Aha, you are just what we want! " she called to me, 
smiling. ''Row us across the pond to the other side." The ladies cautiously took their seats in the boat, assisted 
by the gentlemen, who made quite a parade of their
familiarity with the water. When all the ladies were 
seated, I pushed off from the shore. One of the young 
gentlemen who stood in the prow began, unperceived, to 
rock the boat. The ladies looked frightened, and one or 
two screamed. The Lady fair, who had a lily in her hand, 
and was sitting well in the centre of the skiff, looked down 
with a quiet smile into the clear water, touching the surface 
of the pond now and then with a lily, her image, amid the 
reflections of the clouds and trees, appearing like an angel 
soaring gently through the deep blue skies. 