As I was gazing at her, the other of my two ladies, the 
plump, merry one, suddenly took it into her head that I 
must sing as we glided along, A very elegant young 
gentleman with an eye-glass, who sat beside her, instantly 
turned to her, and, as he kissed her hand, said, " Thanks 
for the poetic idea ! A folk-song sung by one of the people 
in the open air is an Alpine rose, upon the very Alps — the 
Alpine horns are nothing but herbaria — the soul of the 
national consciousness." But I said I did not know anything fine enough to sing to such great people. Then the 
pert lady's-maid, who was beside me with a basket of cups 
and bottles, and whom I had not perceived before, said, 
" He knows a very pretty little song about a lady fair." 
" Yes, yes, sing that one ! " the lady exclaimed. I felt hot 
all over, and the Lady fair lifted her eyes from the water 
and gave me a look that went to my very soul. So I did not 
hesitate any longer, but took heart and sang with all my 
might — 

" I gaze around me, going 
By forest, dale, and lea. 

O'er heights where streams are flowing, 

My every thought bestowing, 
Ah, Lady fair, on thee! 

" And in my garden, finding 

Bright flowers fresh and rare. 
While many a wreath I'm binding, 
Sweet thoughts therein I'm winding 

Of thee, my Lady fair.
" For me 'twould be too daring 

To lay them at her feet. 
They'll soon away be wearing, 
But love beyond comparing 

Is thine, my Lady sweet. 

" In eariy morning waking, 
I toil with ready smile, 
And though my heart be breaking, 
I'll sing to hide its aching, 

And dig my grave the while." 

The boat touched the shore, and all the party got out; 
many of the young gentlemen, as I had perceived, had made 
game of me in whispers to the ladies while I was singing. 
The gentleman with the eye-glass took my hand as he left 
the boat, and said something to me, I do not remember what, 
and the elder of my two ladies gave me a kindly glance. 
The Lady fair had never raised her eyes all the time I was 
singing, and she went away without a word. As for me, 
before my song was ended the tears stood in my eyes ; my 
heart seemed like to burst with shame and misery. I understood now for the first time how beautiful she was, and 
how poor and despised and forsaken I, and when they had 
all disappeared behind the bushes I could contain myself no 
longer, but threw myself down on the grass and wept 
bitterly. 