The highroad was close on one side of the castle garden, 
and separated from it only by a high wall. A very pretty 
little toll-house with a red-tiled roof stood near, with a gay 
little flower-garden inclosed by a picket-fence behind it. A 
breach in the wall connected this garden with the most 
secluded and shady part of the castle garden itself. The 
toll-gate keeper who occupied the cottage died suddenly, 
and early one morning, when I was still sound asleep, the 
Secretary from the castle waked me in a great hurry and 
bade me come immediately to the Bailiff. I dressed myself 
as quickly as I could and followed the brisk Secretary, who,
as we went, plucked a flower here and there and stuck it 
into his button-hole, made scientific lunges in the air with 
his cane, and talked steadily to me all the while, although 
my eyes and ears were so filled with sleep that I could not 
understand anything he said. When we reached the office, 
where as yet it was hardly light, the BailijEf, behind a huge 
inkstand and piles of books and papers, looked at me from 
out of his huge wig like an owl from out its nest, and began : 
" What's your name? Where do you come from? Can 
you read, write, and cipher? " And when I assented, he 
went on, " Well, her Grace, in consideration of your good 
manners and extraordinary merit, appoints you to the 
vacant post of Receiver of Toll." I hurriedly passed in 
mental review the conduct and manners that had hitherto 
distinguished me, and was forced to admit that the Bailiff 
was right. And so, before I knew it, I was Receiver of Toll. 
I took possession of my dwelling, and was soon com- 
fortably established there. The deceased toll-gate keeper 
had left behind him for his successor various articles, 
which I appropriated, among others a magnificent scarlet 
dressing-gown dotted with yellow, a pair of green slippers, 
a tasseled nightcap, and several long-stemmed pipes. I 
had often wished for these things at home, where I used to 
see our village pastor thus comfortably provided. All day 
long, therefore — I had nothing else to do — I sat on the 
bench before my house in dressing-gown and nightcap, 
smoking the longest pipe from the late toll-gate keeper's 
collection, and looking at the people walking, driving, and 
riding on the high-road. I only wished that some of the 
folks from our village, who had always said that I never 
would be worth anything, might happen to pass by and see 
me thus. The dressing-gown became my complexion, and 
suited me extremely well. So I sat there and pondered 
many things — the difficulty of all beginnings, the great 
advantages of an easier mode of existence, for example — 
and privately resolved to give up travel for the future, 
save money like other people, and in time do something
really great in the world. Meanwhile, with all my resolves, 
anxieties, and occupations, I in no wise forgot the Lady 
fair. 