I dug up and threw out of my little garden all the potatoes 
and other vegetables that I found there, and planted it instead with the choicest flowers, which proceeding caused 
the Porter from the castle with the big Roman nose — who 
since I had been made Receiver often came to see me, and 
had become my intimate friend — to eye me askance as a 
person crazed by sudden good fortune. But that did not 
deter me. For from my little garden I could often hear 
feminine voices not far off in the castle garden, and among 
them I thought I coiild distinguish the voice of my Lady 
fair, although, because of the thick shrubbery, I could see 
nobody. And so every day I plucked a nosegay of my 
finest flowers, and when it was dark in the evening, I 
climbed over the wall and laid it upon a marble table in an 
arbor near by, and every time that I brought a fresh nosegay the old one was gone from the table. 

One evening all the castle inmates were away hunting; 
the sun was just setting, flooding the landscape with flame 
and color, the Danube wound toward the horizon like a 
band of gold and fire, and the vine-dressers on all the hills 
throughout the country were glad and gay. I was sitting 
with the Porter on the bench before my cottage, enjoying 
the mild air and the gradual fading to twilight of the briliant day. Suddenly the horns of the returning hunting- 
party sounded on the air; the notes were tossed from hill 
to hill by the echoes. My soul delighted in it all, and I 
sprang up and exclaimed, in an intoxication of joy, " That 
is what I ought to follow in life, the huntsman's noble calling ! " But the Porter quietly knocked the ashes out of his 
pipe and said, "You only think so; I've tried it. You 
hardly earn the shoes you wear out, and you're never with- 
out a cough or a cold from perpetually getting your feet 
wet. " I cannot tell how it was, but upon hearing him speak 
thus, I was seized with such a fit of foolish rage that I
fairly trembled. On a sudden the entire fellow, with his 
bedizened coat, his big feet, his snuff, his big nose, and 
everything about him, became odious to me. Quite beside 
myself, I seized him by the breast of his coat and said, 
" Home with you. Porter, on the instant, or I'll send you 
there in a way you won't like ! " At these words the Porter 
was more than ever convinced that I was crazy. He gazed 
at me with evident fear, extricated himself from my grasp, 
and went without a word, looking reproachfully back at me, 
and striding toward the castle, where he reported me as 
stark, staring mad. 

But after all I burst into a hearty laugh, glad in fact to 
be rid of the pompous fellow, for it was just the hour when 
I was wont to carry my nosegay to the arbor. I clambered 
over the wall, and was just about to place the flowers on the 
marble table, when I heard the sound of a horse's hoofs at 
some distance. There was no time for escape; my Lady 
fair was riding slowly along the avenue in a green hunting-habit, apparently lost in thought. All that I had read in an 
old book of my father's about the beautiful Magelona came 
into my head — how she used to appear among the tall 
forest-trees when horns were echoing and evening shadows 
were flitting through the glades. I could not stir from the 
spot. She started when she perceived me and paused involuntarily. I was as if intoxicated with intense joy, dread, 
and the throbbing of my heart, and when I saw that she 
actually wore at her breast the flowers I had left yesterday, 
I could no longer keep silent, but said in a rapture, " Fairest Lady fair, accept these flowers too, and all the flowers 
in my garden, and everything I have ! Ah, if I could only 
brave some danger for you ! " At first she had looked at 
me so gravely, almost angrily, that I shivered, but then 
she cast down her eyes, and did not lift them while I was 
speaking. At that moment voices and the tramp of horses 
were heard in the distance. She snatched the flowers from 
my hand, and without saying a word, swiftly vanished at 
the end of the avenue.