The fresh light of the morning awoke the young 
married pair. Undine hid bashfully beneath 
her covers while Huldbrand lay still, absorbed 
in deep meditation. Wonderful and horrible 
dreams had disturbed Huldbrand 's rest; he 
had been haunted by spectres, who, grinning at him by 
stealth, had tried to disguise themselves as beautiful 
women, and from beautiful women they all at once assumed 
the faces of dragons, and when he started up from these 
hideous visions the moonlight shone pale and cold into 
the room; terrified he looked at Undine on whose bosom 
he fell asleep and who still lay in unaltered beauty 
and grace. Then he would press a light kiss upon her 
rosy lips and would fall asleep again only to be awakened 
by new terrors. After he had reflected on all this, now that 
he was fully awake, he reproached himself for any doubt 
that could have led him into error with regard to his beautiful wife. He begged her to forgive him for the injustice 
he had done her, but she only held out to him her fair 
hand, sighed deeply, and remained silent. But a glance of 
exquisite fervor, such as he had never seen before, beamed 
from her eyes, carrying with it the full assurance that 
Undine bore him no ill-will. He then rose cheerfully and 
left her, to join his friends in the common apartment.
He found the three sitting round the hearth with an air 
of anxiety, as if they dared not venture to speak aloud. 
The priest seemed to be praying in his inmost spirit that 
all evil might be averted. When, however, they saw the 
young husband come forth so cheerfully, the careworn expression of their faces vanished. 

The old fisherman even began to tease the knight, but in 
so chaste and modest a manner that the aged wife herself 
smiled good-humoredly as she listened to them. Undine at 
length made her appearance. All rose to meet her and all 
stood still with surprise, for the young wife seemed so 
strange to them and yet the same. The priest w^as the first 
to advance toward her, with paternal affection beaming in 
his face, and, as he raised his hand to bless her, the beautiful 
woman sank reverently on her knees before him. With a 
few humble and gracious words she begged him to forgive 
her for any foolish things she might have said the evening 
before, and entreated him in an agitated tone to pray for 
the welfare of her soul. She then rose, kissed her fosterparents, and thanking them for all the goodness they had 
shown her, she exclaimed, " Oh, I now feel in my innermost heart, how much, how infinitely much, you have done 
for me, dear, kind people! " She could not at first desist 
from her caresses, but scarcely had she perceived that the 
old woman was busy in preparing breakfast than she went 
to the hearth, cooked and arranged the meal, and would not 
suffer the good old mother to take the least trouble. 