She continued thus throughout the whole day, quiet, kind, 
and attentive — at once a little matron and a tender bashful girl. The three who had knowTi her longest expected 
every moment to see some whimsical vagary of her capricious spirit burst forth; but they waited in vain for it. 
Undine remained as mild and gentle as an angel. The holy 
father could not take his eyes from her, and he said repeatedly to the bridegroom, " The goodness of heaven, sir, has 
intrusted a treasure to you yesterday through me, unworthy as I am ; cherish it as you ought, and it will promote 
your temporal and eternal welfare."
Toward evening Undine was hanging on the knight's arm 
with humble tenderness, and drew him gently out of the 
door where the declining sun was shining pleasantly on the 
fresh grass and upon the tall slender stems of the trees. 
The eyes of the young wife were moist, as with the dew 
of sadness and love, and a tender and fearful secret seemed 
hovering on her lips — which, however, was disclosed only 
by scarcely audible sighs. She led her husband onward 
and onward in silence; when he spoke she answered him 
only with looks, in which, it is true, there lay no direct 
reply to his inquiries, but a whole heaven of love and timid 
devotion. Thus they reached the edge of the swollen forest-stream, and the knight was astonished to see it rippling 
along in gentle waves, without a trace of its former wildness 
and swell. " By the morning, it will be quite dry, " said the 
beautiful wife, in a regretful tone, " and you can then 
travel away wherever you will, without anything to hinder 
you. " 

" Not without you, my little Undine," replied the knight, 
laughing; " remember, even if I wished to desert you, the 
church, and the spiritual powers, and the emperor, and the 
empire, would interpose and bring the fugitive back again. " 

"All depends upon you, all depends upon you," whispered his wife, half weeping and half smiling. " I think, 
however, nevertheless, that you will keep me with you; 
I love you so heartily. Now carry me across to that 
little island that lies before us. The matter shall be decided 
there. I could easily indeed glide through the rippling 
waves, but it is so restful in your arms, and, if you are to 
cast me off, I shall have sweetly rested in them once more 
for the last time." Huldbrand, full as he was of strange 
fear and emotion, knew not what to reply. He took her in 
his arms and carried her across, remembering now for the 
first time that this was the same little island from which he 
had borne her back to the old fisherman on that first night. 
On the farther side he put her down on the soft grass, and 
was on the point of placing himself lovingly near his beautiful burden when she said, " No, there, opposite to me! I 
will read my sentence in your eyes, before your lips speak ; 
now, listen attentively to what I will relate to you ! " And 
she began.