" You must know, my loved one, that there are beings 
in the elements which appear almost like you mortals, and 
which rarely allow themselves to become visible to your 
race. Wonderful salamanders glitter and sport in the 
flames; lean and malicious gnomes dwell deep thin the 
earth; spirits, belonging to the air, wander through the 
forests ; and a vast family of water spirits live in the lakes 
and streams and brooks. In resounding domes of crystal, 
through which the sky looks in with its sun and stars, these 
latter spirits find their beautiful abode ; lofty trees of coral, 
with blue and crimson fruits, gleam in the gardens; they 
wander over the pure sand of the sea, and among lovely 
variegated shells, and amid all exquisite treasures of the 
old world, wiiich the present is no longer worthy to enjoy ; all 
these the floods have covered with their secret veils of silver, 
and the noble monuments sparkle below, stately and solemn, 
and bedewed by the loving waters which allure from them 
many a beautiful moss-flower and entwining cluster of seagrass. Those, however, who dwell there, are very fair and 
lovely to behold, and for the most part are more beautiful 
than human beings. Many a fisherman has been so fortunate as to surprise some tender mermaid, as she rose above 
the waters and sang. He would then tell afar of her beauty, 
and such wonderful beings have been given the name of 
Undines. You, moreover, are now actually beholding an 
Undine. " 

The knight tried to persuade himself that his beautiful 
wife was under the spell of one of her strange humors and 
that she was taking pleasure in teasing him with one of her 
extravagant inventions. But repeatedly as he said this to 
himself, he could not believe it for a moment; a strange 
shudder passed through him; unable to utter a word, he 
stared at the beautiful narrator with an immovable gaze.
Undine shook her head sorrowfully, drew a deep sigh, and 
then proceeded. 

" Our condition would be far superior to that of you 
human beings — for human beings we call ourselves, being 
similar to them in form and culture — but there is one evil 
peculiar to us. We and our like in the other elements 
vanish into dust and pass away, body and spirit, so that 
not a vestige of us remains behind ; and when you mortals 
hereafter awake to a purer life we remain with the sand 
and the sparks and the wind and the waves. Hence we 
have also no souls; the element moves us and is often 
obedient to us while we live, though it scatters us to dust 
when we die ; and we are merry, without having aught to 
grieve us — merry as the nightingales and little gold-fishes 
and other pretty children of nature. But all beings aspire 
to be higher than they are. Thus my father, who is a 
powerful water-prince in the Mediterranean Sea, desired 
that his only daughter should become possessed of a soul, 
even though she must then endure many of the sufferings 
of those thus endowed. Such as we, however, can obtain a 
soul only by the closest union of love with one of your 
human race. I am now possessed of a soul, and my soul I 
owe you, my inexpressibly beloved one, and it will ever thank 
you if you do not make my whole life miserable. For what 
is to become of me if you avoid and reject me I Still
would not retain you by deceit. And if you mean to reject 
me do so now, and return alone to the shore. I will dive 
into this brook, which is my uncle ; and here in the forest, 
far removed from other friends, he passes his strange and 
solitary life. He is, however, powerful, and is esteemed 
and beloved by many great streams ; and as he brought me 
hither to the fisherman, a light-hearted, laughing child, he 
will take me back again to my parents, a loving, suffering, 
and soul-endowed woman. " 