She was about to say still more, but Huldbrand embraced 
her with the most heartfelt emotion and love, and bore her 
back again to the shore. It was not till he reached it that 
he swore, amid tears and kisses, never to forsake his sweet 
wife, calling himself more happy than the Greek sculptor 
Pygmalion, whose beautiful statue received life from 
Venus and became his loved one. In endearing confidence 
Undine walked back to the cottage, leaning on his arm, 
and feeling now for the first time with all her heart how 
little she ought to regret the forsaken crystal palaces of 
her mysterious father. 
The writer of this story, both because it moves his own 
heart and because he Avishes it to move that of others, begs 
you, dear reader, to pdrdon him if he now briefly passes 
over a considerable space of time, only cursorily mentioning the events that marked it. He knows well that he might 
portray according to the rules of art, step by step, how 
Huldbrand's heart began to turn from Undine to Bertalda; 
how Bertalda more and more responded with ardent love 
to the young knight, and how they both looked upon the 
poor wife as a mysterious being rather to be feared than 
pitied; how Undine wept, and how her tears stung the 
knight's heart with remorse without awakening his former 
love, so that though he at times was kind and endearing to 
her, a cold shudder would soon draw him from her and he 
would turn to his fellow-mortal, Bertalda. All this the 
writer knows might be fully detailed, and perhaps ought to 
have been so ; but such a task w^ould have been too painful, 
for similar things have been known to him by sad experience, and he shrinks from their shadow even in remembrance. 
You know probably a like feeling, dear reader, for such is 
the lot of mortal man. Happy are you if you have received 
rather than inflicted the pain, for in such things it is more 
blessed to receive than to give. If it be so, such recollections will bring only a feeling of sorrow to your mind, and 
perhaps a tear will trickle down your cheek over the faded 
flowers that once caused you such delight. But let that be
enough. We will not pierce our hearts with a thousand 
separate things, but only briefly state, as I have just said, 
how matters were. 
Poor Undine was very sad, and the other two were not 
to be called happy. Bertalda, especially, thought that she 
could trace the effect of jealousy on the part of the injured 
wife whenever her wishes were in any way thwarted. She 
had therefore habituated herself to an imperious demeanor, 
to which Undine yielded in sorrowful submission, and the 
now blinded Huldbrand usually encouraged this arrogant 
behavior in the strongest manner. But the circumstance 
that most of all disturbed the inmates of the castle was a 
variety of wonderful apparitions which met Huldbrand and 
Bertalda in the vaulted galleries of the castle, and which 
had never been heard of before as haunting the locality. 
The tall white man, in whom Huldbrand recognized only too 
plainly Uncle Kiihleborn, and Bertalda the spectral master 
of the fountain, often passed before them with a threatening aspect, and especially before Bertalda, on so many 
occasions that she had several times been made ill with 
terror and had frequently thought of quitting the castle. 
But still she stayed there, partly because Huldbrand was so 
dear to her, and she relied on her innocence, no words of 
love having ever passed between them, and partly also 
because she knew not whither to direct her steps. The old 
fisherman, on receiving the message from the lord of Ringstetten that Bertalda was his guest, had written a few lines 
in an almost illegible hand but as well as his advanced age 
and long disuse would admit of. "I have now become," 
he w^rote, " a poor old widower, for my dear and faithful 
wife is dead. However lonely I now sit in my cottage, 
Bertalda is better with you than with me. Only let her do 
nothing to harm my beloved Undine! She will have my 
curse if it be so." The last words of this letter Bertalda 
flung to the winds, but she carefully retained the part 
respecting her absence from her father — just as we are all 
wont to do in similar circumstances.