One day, when Huldbrand had just ridden out, Undine 
summoned the domestics of the family and ordered them to 
bring a hirge stone and carefully to cover with it the magnificent fountain which stood in the middle of the castleyard. The servants objected that it would oblige them to 
bring water from the valley below. Undine smiled sadly. 
" I am sorry, my people," she replied, " to increase your 
work. I would rather myself fetch up the pitchers, but this 
fountain must be closed. Believe me that it cannot be otherwise, and that it is only by so doing that we can avoid a 
greater evil. " 

The whole household were glad to be able to please their 
gentle mistress; they made no further inquiry, but seized 
the enormous stone. They were just raising it in their 
hands and were already poising it over the fountain, when 
Bertalda came running up and called out to them to stop, 
as it was from this fountain that the water was brought 
which was so good for her complexion and she would never 
consent to its being closed. Undine, however, although 
gentle as usual, was this time more than usually firm. She 
told Bertalda that it was her due, as mistress of the house, 
to arrange her household as she thought best, and that, in 
this, she was accountable to no one but her lord and husband. " See, oh, pray see, " exclaimed Bertalda, in an angry 
yet uneasy tone, " how the poor beautiful water is curling 
and writhing at being shut out from the bright sunshine 
and from the cheerful sight of the human face, for whose 
mirror it was created ! " The water in the fountain was 
indeed wonderfully agitated and hissing; it seemed as if 
something within were struggling to free itself, but Undine 
only the more earnestly urged the fulfilment of her orders. 
The earnestness was scarcely needed. The servants of the 
castle were as happy in obeying their gentle mistress as in 
opposing Bertalda 's haughty defiance; and in spite of all 
the rude scolding and threatening of the latter, the stone 
was soon firmly lying over the opening of the fountain. 
Undine leaned thoughtfully over it and wrote with her
beautiful fingers on its surface. She must, however, have 
had something very sharp and corrosive in her hand, for 
when she turned away and the servants drew near to examine the stone, they perceived all sorts of strange characters upon it, which none of them had seen there before. 

Bertalda received the knight, on his return home in the 
evening, with tears and complaints of Undine's conduct. 
He cast a serious look at his poor wife, and she looked down 
in great distress ; yet she said with great composure, " My 
lord and husband does not reprove even a bond-slave without a hearing, how much less, then, his wedded wife? " 

" Speak," said the knight with a gloomy countenance, 
" what induced you to act so strangely? " 

" I should like to tell you when we are quite alone, " 
sighed Undine. 

" You can tell me just as well in Bertalda 's presence," 
was the rejoinder. 

"Yes, if you command me," said Undine; "but com- 
mand it not. Oh pray, pray command it not ! " She looked 
so humble, so sweet, so obedient, that the knight 's heart felt 
a passing gleam from better times. He kindly placed her 
arm within his own and led her to his apartment, when she 
began to speak as follows.