" You already know, my beloved lord, something of my 
evil uncle, Kiihleborn, and you have frequently been displeased at meeting him in the galleries of this castle. He 
has several times frightened Bertalda into illness. This is 
because he is devoid of soul, a mere elemental mirror of the 
outward world, without the power of reflecting the world 
within. He sees, too, sometimes, that you are dissatisfied 
with me ; that I, in my childishness, am weeping at this, and 
that Bertalda perhaps is at the very same moment laughing. 
Hence he imagines various discrepancies in our home life, 
and in many ways mixes unbidden with our circle. What 
is the good of my reproving him? What is the use of my 
sending him angrily away? He does not believe a word I 
say. His poor nature has no idea that the joys and sorrows
of love have so sweet a resemblance, and are so closely 
linked that no power can separate them, iVmid tears a 
smile shines forth, and a smile allures tears from their 
secret chambers." 

She looked up at Huldbrand, smiling and weeping; and 
he again experienced within his heart all the charm of his 
old love. She felt this, and, pressing him more tenderly to 
her, she continued amid tears of joy, "As the disturber of 
our peace was not to be dismissed wdth words, I have been 
obliged to shut the door upon him. And the only door by 
which he obtains access to us, is that fountain. He is at 
odds with the other water-spirits in the neighborhood, 
counting from the adjacent valleys, and his kingdom only 
recommences further otf on the Danube, into which some of 
his good friends direct their course. For this reason I had 
the stone placed over the opening of the fountain, and I 
inscribed characters upon it which cripple all my uncle's 
power, so that he can now neither intrude upon you, nor 
upon me, nor upon Bertalda. Human beings, it is true, 
can raise the stone again with ordinary etfort, in spite of 
the characters inscribed on it; the inscription does not 
hinder them. If you wish, therefore, follow Bertalda 's desire, but, truly, she knows not what she asks ! The ill-bred 
Kiihleborn has set his mark especially upon her; and if this 
or that came to pass which he has predicted to me and which 
might indeed happen without your meaning any evil — ah
dear one, even you would then be exposed to danger! " 

Huldbrand felt deeply the generosity of his sweet wife, 
in her eagerness to shut up her formidable protector while 
she had even been chided for it by Bertalda. He pressed 
her therefore in his arms with the utmost affection, and 
said with emotion, " The stone shall remain, and all shall 
remain, now and ever, as you wish to have it, my sweet 
little Undine." 

She caressed him with hmnble delight as she heard the 
expressions of love so long withheld, and then at length she 
said, " My dearest friend, since you are so gentle and kind
today, may I venture to ask a favor of you? See now, it is 
just the same with you as it is with summer. In the height 
of its glory summer puts on the flaming and thundering 
crown of mighty storms and assumes the air of a king over 
the earth. You too sometimes let your fury rise, and your 
eyes flash, and your voice is angry, and this becomes you 
well, though I in my folly may sometimes weep at it. But 
never, I pray you, behave thus toward me on the water, or 
even when we are near it. You see, my relatives would 
then acquire a right over me. They would unrelentingly 
tear me from you in their rage because they would imagine 
that one of their race was injured, and I should be compelled all my life to dwell below in the crystal palaces, and 
should never be permitted to ascend to you again; or they 
would send me up to you — and that, oh God, would be 
infinitely worse. No, no, my beloved friend, do not let it 
come to that, however dear poor Undine be to you." He 
promised solemnly to do as she desired, and husband and 
Avife returned from the apartment, full of happiness and 
affection. 