At that moment Bertalda appeared with some workmen 
to whom she had already given orders, and said in the sullen tone which she had assumed of late, " I suppose the 
secret conference is at an end, and now the stone may be 
removed. Go out, workmen, and attend to it." But the 
knight, angry at her impertinence, directed in short and 
very decisive words that the stone should be left; he reproved Bertalda, too, for her violence toward his wife. 
Whereupon the workmen Avithdrew, smiling with secret 
satisfaction; while Bertalda, pale with rage, hurried away 
to her rooms. 

The hour for the evening repast arrived, and Bertalda 
was waited for in vain. They sent after her, but the domestic found her apartments empty, and only brought back 
with him a sealed letter addressed to the knight. He opened 
it Avith alarm, and read : "I feel with shame that I am only 
a poor fisher-girl. I will expiate my fault in having forgotten this for a moment, by returning to the miserable 
cottage of my parents. Farewell to you and your beautiful 
wife. " 

Undine was heartily distressed. She earnestly entreated 
Huldbrand to hasten after their friend and bring her back 
again. Alas! she had no need to urge him. His affection 
for Bertalda burst forth again with vehemence. He hurried 
round the castle, inquiring if any one had seen which way 
the beautiful fugitive had gone. He could learn nothing of 
her and was already on his horse in the castle-yard, resolved to take at a venture the road by which he had brought 
Bertalda hither. Just then a page appeared, who assured 
him that he had met the lady on the path to the Black Valley. Like an arrow the knight sprang through the gateway 
in the direction indicated, without hearing Undine's voice 
of agony as she called to him from the window : " To the 
Black Valley ! Oh, not there ! Huldbrand, don 't go there ! 
or, for Heaven's sake, take me with you! " But when she 
perceived that all her calling was in vain, she ordered her 
white palfrey to be saddled immediately and rode after the 
knight without allowing any servant to accompany her.

The Black Valley lies deep within the mountains. What 
it is now called we do not know. At that time the people 
of the country gave it this appellation on account of the 
deep obscurity in which the low land lay, owing to the 
shadows of the lofty trees, and especially firs, that grew 
there. Even the brook which bubbled between the rocks wore 
the same dark hue, and dashed along with none of that gladness with which streams are wont to flow that have the blue 
sky immediately above them. Now, in the growing twilight 
of evening, it looked altogether wild and gloomy between 
the heights. The knight trotted anxiously along the edge 
of the brook, fearful at one moment that by delay he might 
allow the fugitive to advance too far, and, at the next, that
by too great rapidity he might overlook her in case she were 
concealing herself from him. Meanwhile he had already 
penetrated quite a ways into the valley, and might soon 
hope to overtake the maiden if he were on the right track, 
but the fear that this might not be the case made his heart 
beat with anxiety. Where would the tender Bertalda tarry 
through the stormy night, which was so fearful in the valley, 
should he fail to find her? At length he saw something 
white gleaming through the brandies on the slope of the 
mountain. He thought he recognized Bertalda 's dress, and 
turned his course in that direction. But his horse refused 
to go forward ; it reared impatiently ; and its master, unwilling to lose a moment, and seeing moreover that the copse 
was impassable on horseback, dismounted;