 then, fastening 
his snorting steed to an elm-tree, he worked his way cautiously through the bushes. The branches sprinkled his 
forehead and cheeks with the cold drops of the evening dew ; 
a distant roll of thunder was heard murmuring from the 
other side of the mountains ; everything looked so strange 
that he began to feel a dread of the white figure which now 
lay only a short distance from him on the ground. Still he 
could plainly see that it was a woman, either asleep or in a 
swoon, and that she was attired in long white garments 
such as Bertalda had worn on that day. He stepped close 
up to her, made a rustling with the branches, and let his 
sword clatter, but she moved net. " Bertalda ! " he exclaimed, at first in a low voice, and then louder and louder 
— but still she heard not. At last, when he uttered the dear 
name with a more powerful effort, a hollow echo from the 
mountain-caverns of the valley indistinctly reverberated 
*•* Bertalda ! " but still the sleeper woke not. He bent down 
over her; the gloom of the valley and the obscurity of approaching night would not allow him to distinguish her 
features. 

Just as he was stooping closer over her with a feeling of 
painful doubt, a flash of lightning shot across the valley, 
he saw before him a frightfully distorted countenance, and
a hollow voice exclaimed, " Give me a kiss, you enamoured 
swain ! " Huldbrand sprang up with a cry of horror, and 
the hideous figure rose with him. " Go home! " it murmured; " wizards are on the watch. Go home, or I will 
have you ! " and it stretched out its long white arms toward 
him. 

" Malicious Kiihleborn ! " cried the knight, recovering 
himself. " Hey, 'tis you, you goblin! There, take your 
kiss! " And he furiously hurled his sword at the figure. 
But it vanished like vapor, and a gush of water which 
wetted him through left the knight in no doubt as to the foe 
with whom he had been engaged. " He wishes to frighten 
me back from Bertalda," said he aloud to himself; " he 
thinks to terrify me with his foolish tricks, and to make me 
give up the poor distressed girl to him so that he can wreak 
his vengeance on her. But he shall not do that, weak spirit 
of the elements as he is. No powerless phantom may understand what a human heart can do when its best energies are 
aroused." He felt the truth of his words, and that the 
very expression of them had inspired his heart with fresh 
courage. 

It seemed too as if fortune were on his side, for he had 
not reached his fastened horse when he distinctly heard 
Bertalda 's plaintive voice not far distant, and could catch 
her weeping accents through the ever increasing tumult of 
the thunder and tempest. He hurried swiftly in the direction of the sound, and found the trembling girl just attempting to climb the steep in order to escape in any way from 
the dreadful gloom of the valley. He stepped, however, 
lovingly in her path, and, bold and proud as her resolve had 
been before, she now felt only too keenly the delight that 
the friend whom she so passionately loved should rescue 
her from this frightful solitude, and that the joyous life in 
the castle should be again open to her. She followed almost 
unresisting, but so exhausted with fatigue that the knight 
was glad to lead her to his horse, which he now hastily unfastened in order to lift the fair fugitive upon it ; and then,
cautiously holding the reins, he hoped to proceed through 
the uncertain shades of the valley. 