But the horse had become quite unmanageable from the 
wild apparition of Kiihleborn. Even the knight would have 
had difficulty in mounting the rearing and snorting animal, 
but to place the trembling Bertalda on its back was perfectly impossible. They determined therefore to return 
home on foot. Leading the horse after him by the bridle, 
the knight supported the tottering girl with his other hand. 
Bertalda exerted all her strength to pass quickly through 
the fearful valley, but weariness weighed her do^vn like lead 
and every limb trembled, partly from the terror she had 
endured when Kiihleborn had pursued her, and partly from 
her continued alarm at the howling of the storm and the 
pealing of the thunder through the wooded mountain. 

At last she slid from the supporting arm of her protector, 
and, sinking down on the moss, exclaimed, " Let me lie here, 
my noble lord ; I suffer the punishment due to my folly, and 
I must now perish here anyhow through weariness and 
dread." 

" No, sweet friend, I will never leave you ! " cried Huldbrand, vainly endeavoring to restrain his furious steed ; for, 
worse than before, it now began to foam and rear with excitement, till at last the knight was glad to keep the animal 
at a sufficient distance from the exhausted maiden to save 
her from increasing fear. But scarcely had he withdrawn 
a few paces with the wild steed than she began to call after 
him in the most pitiful manner, believing that he was really 
going to leave her in this horrible mlderness. He was 
utterly at a loss what course to take. Gladly would he have 
given the excited beast its liberty and have allowed it to 
rush away into the night and spend its fury, had he not 
feared that in this narrow defile it might come thundering 
with its iron-shod hoofs over the very spot where Bertalda 
lay. 
In the midst of this extreme perplexity and distress he 
heard with delight the sound of a vehicle driving slowly
down the stony road behind them. He called out for help, 
and a man's voice replied, promising assistance, but bidding 
him have patience; and, soon after, two gray horses appeared through the bushes, and beside them the driver in 
the white smock of a carter ; a great white linen cloth was 
next visible, covering the goods apparently contained in the 
wagon. At a loud shout from their master the obedient 
horses halted. The driver then came toward the knight and 
helped him restrain his foaming animal. " I see Avell," 
said he, " what ails the beast. When I first traveled this 
way my horses acted no better. The fact is, there is an 
evil water-spirit haunting the place, and he takes delight 
in this sort of mischief. But I have learned a charm ; if you 
will let me whisper it in your horse's ear he will stand at 
once just as quiet as my gray beasts are doing there." 