The wagoner then drew down the head of the rearing 
charger close to his own, and whispered something in his 
ear. In a moment the animal stood still and quiet, and his 
quick panting and reeking condition were all that remained 
of his previous unmanageableness. Huldbrand had no time 
to inquire how all this had been effected. He agreed with 
the carter that he should take Bertalda on his wagon, where, 
as the man assured him, there was a quantity of soft cotton 
bales upon which she could be conveyed to Castle Ringstetten, and the knight was to accompany them on horseback. But the horse appeared too much exhausted by its 
past fury to be able to carry its master so far, so the carter 
persuaded Huldbrand to get into the wagon with Bertalda. 
The horse could be tethered on behind. " We are going 
down hill," said he, " and that will make it light for my 
gray beasts." The knight accepted the offer and entered 
the wagon with Bertalda; the horse followed patiently 
behind, and the wagoner, steady and attentive, walked by 
the side. 

In the stillness of the night, as its darkness deepened and
the subsiding tempest sounded more and more remote, 
encouraged by the sense of security and their fortunate 
escape a confidential conversation arose between Huldbrand and Bertalda. With flattering words he reproached 
her for her daring flight ; she excused herself with humility 
and emotion, and from every word she said a gleam shone 
forth which disclosed distinctly to the lover that the beloved 
was his. The knight felt the sense of her words far more 
than he regarded their meaning, and it was the sense alone 
to which he replied. Presently the wagoner suddenly 
shouted with a loud voice. " Up, my grays, up with your 
feet, keep together ! Remember who you are ! " The knight 
leaned out of the wagon and saw that the horses were stepping into the midst of a foaming stream or were already 
almost swimming, while the wheels of the wagon were rushing round and gleaming like mill-w^heels, and the wagoner 
had climbed up in front in consequence of the increasing 
waters. 

" "What sort of a road is this ? It goes into the very middle of the stream," cried Huldbrand to his guide. 

" Not at all, sir," returned the other laughing, " it is just 
the reverse; the stream goes into the very middle of our 
road. Look round and see how every thing is covered by 
the water. " 

The whole valley indeed was suddenly filled with the 
surging flood, that visibly increased. " It is Kiihleborn, the 
evil water-spirit, who wishes to drown us ! " exclaimed the 
knight. " Have you no charm against him, my friend I " 

" I know indeed of one," returned the wagoner, " but I 
cannot and may not use it until you know who I am. " 

" Is this a time for riddles ! " cried the knight. " The 
flood is ever rising higher, and what does it matter to me 
to know who you are ! " 