Half an hour after the earthquake the heavens 
swathed themselves in seas, and dashed them 
down in masses and in torrents. The naked 
Campagna and heath were covered with the 
mantle of rain. Gaspard was silent, the 
heavens black; the great thought stood alone in Albano 
that he was hastening on toward the bloody scaffold and 
the throne-scaffolding of humanity, the heart of a cold, 
dead heathen-world, the eternal Eome ; and when he heard, 
on the Ponte Molle, that he was now going across the Tiber, 
then w^as it to him as if the past had risen from the dead, 
as if the stream of time ran backward and bore him with it; 
under the streams of heaven he heard the seven old mountain-streams, rushing and roaring, which once came down 
from Rome 's hills, and, with seven arms, uphove the world 
from its foundations. At length the constellation of the 
mountain city of God, that stood so broad before him, 
opened out into distant nights; cities, with scattered lights, 
lay up and down, and the bells (which to his ear were 
alarm-bells) sounded out the fourth hour;t when the 
carriage rolled through the triumphal gate of the city, the 
Porta del Popolo, then the moon rent her black heavens, 
and poured down out of the cleft clouds the splendor of 
a whole sky. There stood the Egyptian Obelisk of the 
gateway, high as the clouds, in the night, and three streets 
ran gleaming apart. " So," (said Albano to himself, as 
they passed through the long Corso to the tenth ward) 
" thou art veritably in the camp of the God of war — here 
is where he grasped the hilt of the monstrous war-sword, 
and with the point made the three wounds in three quarters 
of the world!" Rain and splendor gushed through the 
vast, broad streets ; occasionally he passed suddenly along 
by gardens, and into broad city-deserts and market-places 
of the past. The rolling of the carriages amidst the rush 
and roar of the rain resembled the thunder whose days 
were once holy to this heroic city, like the thundering 
heaven to the thundering earth; muffled-up forms, with 
little lights, stole through the dark streets; often there 
stood a long palace with colonnades in the light of the 
moon, often a solitary gray column, often a single high 
fir tree, or a statue behind cypresses. Once, when there 
was neither rain nor moonshine, the carriage went round 
the corner of a large house, on whose roof a tall, blooming 
virgin, with an uplooking child on her arm, herself directed 
a little hand-light, now toward a white statue, now toward 
the child, and so, alternately, illuminated each. This 
friendly group made its way to the very centre of his 
soul, now so highly exalted, and brought with it, to him, 
many a recollection; particularly was a Roman child to him 
a wholly new and mighty idea. 

They alighted at last at the Prince di Laiiria's — 
Gaspard's father-in-law and old friend. Albano, 
dissatisfied with all, kept his inspiration sacrificing to the 
unearthly gods of the past round about him, after the old 
fashion, namely, with silence. Well might he and could 
he have discussed, but otherwise, namely in odes, with the 
whole man, with streams which mount and grow upward. 
He looked even more and more longingly out of the window 
at the moon in the pure rain-blue, and at single columns 
of the Forum; out of doors there gleamed for him the 
greatest world. At last he rose up, indignant and impatient, and stole down into the glimmering glory, and 
stepped before the Forum; but the moonlit night, that 
decoration-painter, which works with irregular strokes, 
made almost the very stage of the scene irrecognizable to 
him.