What a dreary, broad plain, loftily encompassed with 
ruins, gardens and temples, covered with prostrate capitals 
of columns, and with single, upright pillars, and with trees 
and a dumb wilderness! The heaped-up ashes out of the 
emptied urn of Time ! And the potsherds of a great world 
flung around ! He passed by three temple columns,* which 
the earth had drawn down into itself even to the breast, 
and along through the broad triumphal arch of Septimius 
Severus; on the right, stood a chain of columns without 
their temple; on the left, attached to a Christian church, 
the colonnade of an ancient heathen temple, deep sunken 
into the sediment of time; at last the triumphal arch of 
Titus, and before it, in the middle of the woody wilderness, 
a fountain gushing into a granite basin. 

He went up to this fountain, in order to survey the plain 
out of which the thunder months of the earth once arose; 
but he went along as over a burnt-out sun, hung round 
with dark, dead earths. " Man, the dreams of Man ! " 
something within him unceasingly cried. He stood on the 
granite margin, turning toward the Coliseum, whose 
mountain ridges of wall stood high in the moonlight, with 
the deep gaps which had been hewn in them by the scythe 
of Time. Sharply stood the rent and ragged arches of 
Nero's golden house close by, like murderous cutlasses. 
The Palatine Hill lay full of green gardens, and, in 
crumbling temple-roofs, the blooming death-garland of ivy 
was gnawing, and living ranunculi still glowed around 
sunken capitals. The fountain murmured babblingly and 
forever, and the stars gazed steadfastly down, with transitory rays, upon the still battlefield over which the winter 
of time had passed without bringing after it a spring; 
the fiery soul of the world had flown up, and the cold, 
crumbling giant lay around ; torn asunder were the gigantic 
spokes of the main-wheel, which once the very stream of 
ages drove. And in addition to all this, the moon shed 
down her light like eating silver-water upon the naked 
columns, and would fain have dissolved the Coliseum and 
the temples and all into their own shadows ! 

Then Albano stretched out his arm into the air, as if he 
were giving an embrace and flowing away as in the arms 
of a stream, and exclaimed, " ye mighty shades, ye, who 
once strove and lived here, ye are looking down from 
Heaven, but scornfully, not sadly, for your great fatherland 
has died and gone after you ! Ah, had I, on the insignificant 
earth, full of old eternity which you have made great, only 
done one action worthy of you! Then were it sweet to me 
and legitimate to open my heart by a wound, and to mix 
earthly blood with the hallowed soil, and, out of the world 
of graves, to hasten away to you, eternal and immortal 
ones ! But I am not worthy of it ! "