At this moment there came suddenly along up the Via 
Sacra a tall man, deeply enveloped in a mantle, who drew 
near the fountain without looking round, threw down his 
hat, and held a coal-black, curly, almost perpendicular, 
hindhead under the stream of water. But hardly had he, 
turning upward, caught a glimpse of the profile of Albano, 
absorbed in his fancies, when he started up, all dripping, 
stared at the count, fell into an amazement, threw his arms 
high into the air, and said, "Amico! " Albano looked at 
him. The stranger said, "-Albano! " " My Dian! " cried 
Albano; they clasped each other passionately and wept 
for love. 

Dian could not comprehend it at all; he said in Italian: 
" But it surely cannot be you ; you look old. " He thought 
he was speaking German all the time, till he heard Albano 
answer in Italian. Both gave and received only questions. 
Albano found the architect merely browner, but there was 
the lightning of the eyes and every faculty in its old glory. 
With three words he related to him the journey, and who 
the company were. " How does Rome strike you? " asked 
Dian, pleasantly. "As life does," replied Albano, very 
seriously, " it makes me too soft and too hard. " " I recognize here absolutely nothing at all," he continued; " do
those columns belong to the magnificent temple of Peace ? " 
" No, " said Dian, " to the temple of Concord ; of the other 
there stands yonder nothing but the vault. " " Where is 
Saturn 's temple ? " asked Albano. " Buried in St. Adrian 's 
church," said Dian, and added hastily: " Close by stand 
the ten columns of Antonine's temple; over beyond there 
the baths of Titus ; behind us the Palatine hill ; and so on. 
Now tell me — ! " 

They walked up and down the Forum, between the arches 
of Titus and Severus. Albano (being near the teacher who, 
in the days of childhood, had so often conducted him hitherward) was yet full of the stream which had swept over the 
world, and the all-covering water sunk but slowly. He 
went on and said: " Today, when he beheld the Obelisk, 
the soft, tender brightness of the moon had seemed to him 
eminently unbecoming for the giant city; he would rather 
have seen a sun blazing on its broad banner; but now the 
moon was the proper funeral-torch beside the dead Alexander, who, at a touch, collapses into a handful of dust." 
" The artist does not get far with feelings of this kind," 
said Dian, " he must look upon everlasting beauties on the 
right hand and on the left." " Where," Albano went on 
asking, " is the old lake of Curtius — the Rostrum — the 
pila Horatia — the temple of Vesta — of Venus, and of 
all those solitary columns? " "And where is the marble 
Forum itself? " said Dian; " it lies thirty span deep below 
our feet. " " "Where is the great, free people, the senate of 
kings, the voice of the orators, the procession to the 
Capitol? Buried under the mountain of potsherds ! Dian, 
how can a man who loses a father, a beloved, in Rome shed 
a single tear or look round him with consternation, when 
he comes out here before this battle-field of time and looks 
into the charnel-house of the nations? Dian, one would 
wish here an iron heart, for fate has an iron hand ! " 