Dian, who nowhere stayed more reluctantly than upon 
such tragic cliffs hanging over, as it were, into the sea of 
eternity, almost leaped off from them with a joke ; like the
Greeks, he blended dances with tragedy! " Many a thing 
is preserved here, friend! " said he; " in Adrian's church 
yonder they will still show you the bones of the three men 
that walked in the fire." " That is just the frightful play 
of destiny," replied Alba no, " to occupy the heights of 
the mighty ancients with monks shorn down into slaves." 

" The stream of time drives new wheels," said Dian: 
"yonder lies Raphael twice buried.* " " * And so 
they climbed silently and speedily over rubbish and torsos 
of columns, and neither gave heed to the mighty emotion 
of the other. 

Rome, like the Creation, is an entire wonder, which 
gradually dismembers itself into new wonders, the Coliseum, the Pantheon, St. Peter's church, Raphael, etc. 

With the passage through the church of St. Peter, the 
knight began the noble course through Immortality. The 
Princess let herself, by the tie of Art, be bound to the circle 
of the men. As Albano was more smitten with edifices than 
with any other work of man, so did he see from afar, with 
holy heart, the long mountain-chain of Art, which again 
bore upon itself hills, so did he stop before the plain, around 
which the enormous colonnades run like Corsos, bearing 
a people of statues. In the centre shoots up the Obelisk, 
and on its right and left an eternal fountain, and from the 
lofty steps the proud Church of the world, inwardly filled 
with churches, rearing upon itself a temple toward Heaven, 
looks down upon the earth. But how wonderfully, as they 
drew near, had its columns and its rocky wall mounted up 
and flown away from the vision! 

He entered the magic church, which gave the world 
blessings, curses, kings and popes, with the consciousness, 
that, like the world-edifice, it was continually enlarging and 
receding more and more the longer one remained in it. 
They went up to two children of white marble who held 
an incense-muscle-shell of yellow marble ; the children grew 
by nearness till they were giants. At length they stood
at the main altar and its hundred perpetual lamps. What 
a place! Above them the heaven's arch of the dome, resting on four inner towers; around them an over-arched 
city of four streets in which stood churches. The temple 
became greatest by walking in it; and, when they passed 
round one column, there stood a new one before them, and 
holy giants gazed earnestly down. 