Here was the youth's large heart, after so long a time, 
filled. " In no art, " said he to his father, " is the soul 
so mightily possessed with the sublime as in architecture; 
in every other the giant stands within and in the depths of 
the soul, but here he stands out of and close before it." 
Dian, to whom all images were more clear than abstract 
ideas, said he was perfectly right. Fraischdorfer replied, 
" The sublime also here lies only in the brain, for the whole 
church stands, after all, in something greater, namely, in 
Rome, and under the heavens; in the presence of which 
latter we certainly should not feel anything." He also 
complained that " the place for the sublime in his head was 
very much narrowed by the innumerable volutes and monuments which the temple shut up therein at the same time 
with itself." Gaspard, taking everything in a large sense, 
remarked, " When the sublime once really appears, it then, 
by its very nature, absorbs and annihilates all little circumstantial ornaments." He adduced as evidence the 
tower of the Minster,* and Nature itself, which is not made 
smaller by its grasses and villages. 

Among so many connoisseurs of art, the Princess en- 
joyed in silence. 

The ascent of the dome Gaspard recommended to defer 
to a dry and cloudless day, in order that they might behold 
the queen of the world, Rome, upon and from the proper 
throne; he therefore proposed, very zealously, the visiting of the Pantheon, because he was eager to let this follow 
immediately after the impression of Saint Peter's church. 
They went thither. How simply and grandly the hall 
opens! Eight yellow columns sustain its brow, and majestically as the head of the Homeric Jupiter its temple 
arches itself. It is the Rotunda or Pantheon. " the 
pigmies," cried Albano, " who would fain give us new 
temples! Raise the old ones higher out of the rubbish, 
and then you have built enough ! " * They stepped in. 
There rose round about them a holy, simple, free worldstructure, with its heaven-arches soaring and striving 
upward, an Odeum of the tones of the Sphere-music, a 
world in the world ! And overheadf the eye-socket of the 
light and of the sky gleamed down, and the distant rack 
of clouds seemed to touch the lofty arch over which it shot 
along! And round about them stood nothing but the 
temple-bearers, the columns! The temple of all gods 
endured and concealed the diminutive altars of the later 
ones. 

Gaspard questioned Albano about his impressions. He 
said he preferred the larger church of Saint Peter. The 
knight approved, and said that youth, like nations, always 
more easily found and better appreciated the sublime than 
the beautiful, and that the spirit of the young man ripened 
from strong to beautiful, as the body of the same ripens 
from the beautiful into the strong; however, he him- 
self preferred the Pantheon. " How could the moderns," 
said the Counsellor of Arts, Fraischdorfer, "build anything, except some little Bernini-like turrets? " " That is 
why," said the offended Provincial Architect, Dian (who 
despised the Counsellor of Arts, because he never made a 
good figure except in the esthetic hall of judgment as 
critic, never in the exhibition-hall as painter), "we moderns are, without contradiction, stronger in criticism; 
though in practice we are, collectively and individually, 
blockheads." Bouverot remarked that the Corinthian col- 
umns might be higher. 