The Counsellor of Arts said that 
after all he knew nothing more like this fine hemisphere 
than a much smaller one, which he had found in Hercu- 
laneum molded in ashes, of the bosom of a fair fugitive." 
The knight laughed, and Albano turned away in disgust 
and went to the Princess. 

He asked her for her opinion about the two temples. 
" Sophocles here, Shakespeare there; but I comprehend 
and appreciate Sophocles more easily," she replied, and 
looked with new eyes into his new countenance. For the 
supernatural illumination through the zenith of Heaven, 
not through a hazy horizon, transfigured, in her eyes, the 
beautiful and excited countenance of the youth; and she 
took for granted that the saintly halo of the dome must 
also exalt her form. When he answered her : " Very good ! 
But in Shakespeare, Sophocles also is contained, not, however, Shakespeare in Sophocles — and upon Peter's Church 
stands Angelo 's Rotunda ! ", just then the lofty cloud, all 
at once, as by the blow of a hand out of the ether, broke in 
two, and the ravished Sun, like the eye of a Venus floating 
through her ancient heavens — for she once stood even 
here — looked mildly in from the upper deep; then a holy 
radiance filled the temple, and burned on the porphyry of 
the pavement, and Albano looked around him in an ecstasy 
of wonder and delight, and said with low voice : " How 
transfigured at this moment is everything in this sacred 
place! Raphael's spirit comes forth from his grave in 
this noontide hour, and everything which its reflection 
touches brightens into godlike splendor ! " The Princess 
looked upon him tenderly, and he lightly laid his hand upon 
hers, and said, as one vanquished, " Sophocles! " 

On the next moonlit evening, Gaspard bespoke torches, 
in order that the Coliseum, with its giant-circle, might the 
first time stand in fire before them. The knight would 
fain have gone around alone with his son, dimly through 
the dim work, like two spirits of the olden time, but the 
Princess forced herself upon him, from a too lively wish 
to share with the noble youth his great moments, and perhaps, in fact, her heart and his own. Women do not sufficiently comprehend that an idea, when it fills and elevates 
man's mind, shuts it, then, against love, and crowds out 
persons; whereas with woman all ideas easily become 
human beings. 