They passed over the Forum, by the Via Sacra, to the 
Coliseum, whose lofty, cloven forehead looked down pale 
under the moonlight. They stood before the gray rock-walls, which reared themselves on four colonnades one 
above another, and the torchlight shot up into the arches 
of the arcades, gilding the green shrubbery high overhead, 
and deep in the earth had the noble monster already buried 
his feet. They stepped in and ascended the mountain, full 
of fragments of rock, from one seat of the spectators to 
another, Gaspard did not venture to the sixth or highest, 
where the men used to stand, but Albano and the Princess 
did. Then the youth gazed down over the cliffs, upon the 
round, green crater of the burnt-out volcano, which once 
swallowed nine thousand beasts at once, and which quenched 
itself with human blood. The lurid glare of the torches 
penetrated into the clefts and caverns, and among the 
foliage of the ivy and laurel, and among the great shadows 
of the moon, which, like departed spirits, hovered in caverns. 
Toward the south, where the streams of centuries and barbarians had stormed in, stood single columns and bare 
arcades. Temples and three palaces had the giant fed and 
lined with his limbs, and still, with all his wounds, he looked 
out livingly into the world. 

" What a people ! " said Albano. " Here curled the 
giant snake five times about Christianity. Like a smile of 
scorn lies the moonlight down below there upon the green 
arena, where once stood the Colossus of the Sun-god. The 
star of the north* glimmers low through the windows, and 
the Serpent and the Bear crouch. What a world has gone 
by ! " The Princess answered that " twelve thousand prisoners built this theatre, and that a great many more had 
bled therein." " 1 we too have building prisoners," said 
he, " but for fortifications; and blood, too, still flows, but 
with sweat ! No, we have no present ; the past, without it, 
must bring forth a future. " 

The Princess went to break a laurel-twig and pluck a 
blooming wall-flower. Albano sank away into musing : the 
autumnal wind of the past swept over the stubble. On 
this holy eminence he saw the constellations, Rome's green 
hills, the glimmering city, the Pyramid of Cestius ; but all 
became Past, and on the twelve hills dwelt, as upon graves, 
the lofty old spirits, and looked sternly into the age, as 
if they were still its kings and judges. 

" This to remember the place and time ! " said the 
approaching Princess, handing him the laurel and the 
flower. " Thou mighty One ! a Coliseum is thy flower-pot ; 
to thee is nothing too great, and nothing too small ! " said 
he, and threw the Princess into considerable confusion, till 
she observed that he meant not her, but nature. His whole 
being seemed newly and painfully moved, and, as it were, 
removed to a distance: he looked down after his father, 
and went to find him; he looked at him sharply, and spoke 
of nothing more this evening.