The latter half of the eighteenth century has 
been styled the Age of Enlightenment, a convenient name for a period in which there 
was a noticeable attempt to face the obvious, 
external facts of life in a clear-eyed and 
courageous way. The centralizing of political power in 
the hands of Louis XIV. of France and his successors had 
been accompanied by a " standardizing " of human affairs 
which favored practical efficiency and the easier running of 
the social machine, but which was far from helpful to the 
self-expression of distinctly-marked individuals. 

The French became sovereign arbiters of taste and form, 
but their canons of art were far from nature and the 
free impulses of mankind. The particular development of 
this spirit of clarity in Berlin, the centre of German influence, lay in the tendency to challenge all historic continuity, 
and to seek uniformity based upon practical needs. 

Rousseau's revolutionary protests against inequality and 
artificiality — particularly his startling treatise On the 
Origin and Foundations of Inequality among Men (1754) — 
and his fervent preaching of the everlasting superiority of 
the heart to the head, constitute the most important factor 
in a great revolt against regulated social institutions, which 
led, at length, to the " Storm and Stress " movement in 
Germany, that boisterous forerunner of Romanticism, yet 
so unlike it that even Schlegel compared its most typical 
representatives to the biblical herd of swine which stampeded — into oblivion.
 Herder, proclaiming the vital connection between the soul of a whole nation and its literature, and preaching a religion of the feelings rather than
 a gospel of " enlightenment ; " young Goethe, by his daring 
and untrammeled Shakespearian play, Goetz von Berlichingen, and by his open defiance, announced in Werther, of 
the authority of all artistic rules and standards ; and Biirger, asserting the right of the common man to be the only 
arbiter of literary values, were, each in his own way, upsetting the control of an artificial " classicism. " Immanuel 
Kant, whose deep and dynamic thinking led to a revolution 
comparable to a cosmic upheaval in the geological world, 
compelled his generation to discover a vast new moral system utterly disconcerting to the shallow complacency of 
those who had no sense of higher values than " practical 
efficiency. " 

When, in 1794, Goethe and Schiller, now matured and 
fully seasoned by a deep-going classical and philosophical 
discipline, joined their splendid forces and devoted their 
highest powers to the building up of a comprehensive 
esthetic philosophy, the era was fully come for new constructive efforts on German soil. Incalculably potent was 
the ferment liberated by Goethe's Wilhelm Meister (1795- 
1796) — its attacking the problem of life from the emo- 
tional and esthetic side ; its defense of the " call " of the 
individual as outweighing the whole social code; its assertion that genius outranks general laws, and imagination 
every-day rules ; its abundance of " poetic " figures taking 
their part in the romance. 

The birth of the Romantic School can be pretty definitely 
set at about 1796; its cradle was in the quaint university 
town of Jena, at that time the home of Schiller and his 
literary-esthetic enterprises, and only a few miles away 
from Goethe in Weimar. Five names embody about all 
that was most significant in the earlier movement : Fichte, 
flie brothers Friedrich and Wilhelm Schlegel, Tieck, and 
Novalis. 