The discussion of Fichte belonging to another division 
of this work, it is enough to recall here that he was already 
professor of philosophy at Jena when the Schlegel brothers 
made their home there in 1796, and that it was while there 
that he published his Doctrine of Science, the charter of 
independence of the Romantic School, announcing the annihilation of physical values, proclaiming the soul as above 
things perceived, the inner spirit as that alembic in which 
all objects are produced. With almost insolent freshness 
Fichte asserted a re-valuation of all values: what had 
been " enlightenment " was now to be called shallowness; 
" ancient crudities " were to be reverenced as deeper perceptions of truth ; " fine literature " was to be accounted a 
frivolous thing. Fichte made a stirring appeal to young 
men, especially, as being alone able to perceive the meaning 
of science and poetry. 

To take part in the contagion of these ideas, there settled 
in Jena in 1796 the two phenomenal Schlegel brothers. It 
is not easy or necessary to separate, at this period, the 
activities of their agile minds. From their early days, as 
sons in a most respectable Lutheran parsonage in North 
Germany, both had shown enormous hunger for cultural 
information, both had been voracious in exploiting the 
great libraries within their reach. It is generally asserted 
that they were lacking in essential virility and stamina; 
as to the brilliancy of their acquisitions, their fineness of 
appreciation, and their wit, there can be no question whatever. Madame de Stael called them " the fathers of modern 
criticism," a title which has not been challenged by the 
best authorities of our time. 

Friedrich von Schlegel (1772-1829), the younger of the 
two, is counted to be the keener and more original mind. 
He had a restless and unsettled youth, mostly spent in 
studies; after various disappointments, he determined to 
make classical antiquity his life-work ; while mastering the 
body of ancient literature, he was assimilating, with much 
the same sort of eagerness, the philosophical systems of 
Kant and Fichte. His first notable publication was an 
esthetic-philosophic essay, in the ample style of Schiller's 
later discourses. Concerning the Study of Greek Poetry.
He found in the Greeks of the age of Sophocles the ideal of 
a fully developed humanity, and exhibited throughout the 
discussion a remarkable mastery of the whole field of 
classical literature. Just at this time he removed to Jena 
to join his older brother, Wilhelm, who was connected with 
Schiller's monthly The Hours and his annual Almanac of 
the Muses. By a strange condition of things Friedrich 
was actively engaged at the moment in writing polemic 
reviews for the organs of Reichardt, one of Schiller's 
most annoying rivals in literary journalism; these reviews became at once noticeable for their depth and 
vigorous originality, particularly that one which gave 
a new and vital characterization of Lessing. In 1797 
he moved to Berlin, where he gathered a group about 
him, including Tieck, and in this way established the 
external and visible body of the Romantic School, which 
the brilliant intellectual atmosphere of the Berlin salons, 
with their wealth of gifted and cultured women, did much 
to promote. In 1799 both he and Tieck joined the Romantic 
circle at Jena. 