In Berlin he published in 1798 the first volume of the 
AthencBum, that journal which in a unique way represents 
the pure Romantic ideal at its actual fountain-head. It 
survived for three years, the last volume appearing in 
1800. Its aim was to " collect all rays of human culture 
into one focus, " and, more particularly, to confute the claim 
of the party of " enlightenment " that the earlier ages of 
human development were poor and unworthy of respect on 
the part of the closing eighteenth century. A very large 
part of the journal was written by the two brothers. Friedrich furnishing the most aggressive contributions, more 
notably being responsible for the epigrammatic Fragments, 
which became, in their detached brevity and irresponsi- 
bility, a very favorite model for the form of Romantic doctrine. " I can talk daggers, " he had said when younger, 
and he wrote the greater part of these, though some were 
contributed by Wilhelm Schlegel, by his admirable wife
Caroline, by Schleiermacher, and Novalis. The root of this 
form lies in French thinking and expression — especially 
the short deliverances of Chamfort, the epigrammatist of 
the French Revolution. These Orphic-apocalyptic sentences are a sort of foundation for a new Romantic bible. 
They are absolutely disconnected, they show a mixture and 
interpenetration of different spheres of thought and observation, with an unexpected deference to the appraisals of 
classic antiquity. Their range is unlimited: philosophy 
and psycholog}", mathematics and esthetics, philosophy and 
natural science, sociology and society, literature and the 
theatre are all largely represented in their scope. 

Friedrich Schlegel's epigrammatic wit is the direct precursor of Heine's clever conceits in prose: one is instantly 
reminded of him by such Athenceum-tragments as " Kant, 
the Copernicus of Philosophy; " " Plato's philosophy is a 
worthy preface to the religion of the future ; " " So-called 
* happy marriages ' are related to love, as a correct poem 
to an improvised song; " "In genuine prose all words 
should be printed in italics; " " Catholicism is na'ive Christianity; Protestantism is sentimental." The sheer whimsicality of phrase seems to be at times its own excuse for 
being, as in an explanation of certain elegiac poems as 
" the sensation of misery in the contemplation of the silliness of the relations of banality to craziness; " but there 
are many sentences which go deep below the surface — none 
better remembered, perhaps, than the dictum, " The French 
Revolution, Fichte's Doctrine of Science, and Goethe's 
Wilhelm Meister are the greatest sjnnptoms of our age." 

In the AtliencBum both brothers give splendid testimony 
to their astonishing and epoch-making gift in transferring 
classical and Romance metrical forms into elegant, idiomatic German ; they give affectionate attention to the insinuating beauty of elegiac verse, and secure charming effects 
in some of the most alien Greek forms, not to mention terza 
rima, ottava rima, the Spanish gloss, and not a few very 
notable sonnets.