The literary criticisms of the Athenceum are character- 
istically free and aggressive, particularly in the frequent 
sneers at the flat " homely " poetry of sandy North Ger- 
many. At the end of the second volume, the " faked " 
Literary Announcements are as daring as any attempts of 
American newspaper humor. When the sum of the con- 
tents and tendency of the journal is drawn, it is a strange 
mixture of discriminating philosophy, devoted Christianity, 
Greek sensuousness, and pornographic mysticism. There 
is a never-ending esthetic coquetry with the flesh, with a 
serious defense of some very Greek practices indeed. All 
of this is thoroughly typical of the spirit of the Romantic 
school, and it is by no means surprising that Friedrich's 
first book, the novel Lucinda (1799), should stand as the 
supreme unsavory classic in this field. That excellent 
divine, Schleiermacher, exalted this document of the Rights 
of the Flesh as " a paean of Love, in all its completeness, " 
but it is a feeble, tiresome performance, absolutely without 
structure, quite deserving the saucy epigram on which it 
was pilloried by the wit of the time : 

Pedantry once of Fancy begged the dole 

Of one brief kiss; she pointed him to Shame. 

He, impotent and wanton, then Shame's favors stole. 

Into the world at length a dead babe came — 

" Lucinda " was its name. 

The preaching of " religion," " womanliness," and the 
" holy fire of divine enjoyment" makes an unedifying 
melange: " The holiest thing in any human being is his 
own mind, his own power, his own will; " " You do all 
according to your own mind, and refuse to be swayed by 
what is usual and proper." Schleiermacher admired in 
it that " highest wisdom and profoundest religion " which 
lead people to " yield to the rhythm of fellowship and friendship, and to disturb no harmony of love. " In more prosaic 
diction, the upshot of its teaching was the surrender to 
momentary feelings, quite divorced from Laws or Things. 
The only morality is " full Humanity ; " " Nature alone is
worthy of honor, and sound health alone is worthy of 
love; " " Let the discourse of love," counsels Julius, " be 
bold and free, not more chastened than a Roman elegy " — 
which is certainly not very much — and the skirmishes of 
inclination are, in fact, set forth with an almost antique 
simplicity. Society is to be developed only by " wit, " 
which is seriously put into comparison with God Almighty. 
As to practical ethics, one is told that the most perfect life 
is but a pure vegetation ; the right to indolence is that which 
really makes the discrimination between choice and com- 
mon beings, and is the determining principle of nobility. 
" The divine art of being indolent " and " the blissful 
bosom of half -conscious self-forgetfulness " naturally lead 
to the thesis that the empty, restless exertion of men in 
general is nothing but Gothic perversity, and " boots 
naught but ennui to ourselves and others." Man is by 
nature " a serious beast ; one must labor to counteract this 
shameful tendency." Schleiermacher ventured, it is true, 
to raise the question as to whether the hero ought not to 
have some trace of the chivalrous about him, or ought not 
to do something effective in the outer world — and posterity 
has fully supported this inquiry. 