Friedrich's next most important move was to Paris 
(1802), where he gave lectures on philosophy, and attempted 
another journal. Here he began his enthusiastic studies 
of the Sanskrit language and literature, which proved to 
have an important influence on the development of modem 
philology. This is eminently true of his work On the Language and Wisdom of the Indians (1808). In 1804 he 
removed to Cologne, where he entered with great eagerness 
into the work of re-discovering the medieval Lower Rhenish 
School of religious art and Gothic architecture. In 1808 
he, with his wife Dorothea (the daughter of Moses Mendelssohn, who years before this time had left her home and 
family to become his partner for life), entered the Roman 
Catholic church, the interests of which engaged much of his 
energies for the remainder of his life. He lived most of
the time in Vienna, partly engaged in the literary service 
of the Austrian government, partly in lecturing on history 
and literature. He died in 1829 in Dresden, whither he 
had gone to deliver a course of lectures. 

Friedrich Schlegel's philosophy of life was based upon 
the theory of supremacy of the artist, the potency of poetry, 
with its incidental corollaries of disregard for the Kantian 
ideal of Duty, and aversion to all Puritanism and Protestantism. " There is no great world but that of artists, " he 
declared in the Athenceum; " artists form a higher caste; 
they should separate themselves, even in their way of living, from other people." Poetry and philosophy formed 
in his thought an inseparable unit, forever joined, " though 
seldom together — like Castor and Pollux." His interest 
is in " Humanity," that is to say, a superior type of the 
species, with a corresponding contempt for " commonness, " 
especially for the common man as a mere machine of 
" duty. " On performances he set no great store : " Those 
countenances are most interesting to me in which Nature 
seems to have indicated a great design without taking time 
to carry it out." 

August Wilhelm von Schlegel (1767-1845), more simply 
known as " Wilhelm, " was the more balanced, dignified, 
and serene nature, and possessed in a far higher degree 
than Friedrich the art of steering his course smoothly 
through life. Of very great significance in his training 
were his university years at Gottingen, and his acquaintance there with the poet Biirger, that early apostle of revolt 
from a formal literature, whose own life had become more 
and more discredited and was destined to go out in wretchedness and ignominy ; the latter 's fecundating activities had 
never been allowed full scope, but something of his spirit 
of adventure into new literary fields was doubtless caught 
by the younger man. Burger's attempts at naturalizing the 
sonnet, for instance, are interesting in view of the fact that 
Wilhelm Schlegel became the actual creator of this literary 
form among the Germans. Schlegel's own pursuits as a
student were prevailingly in the field of Hellenism, in 
which his acquisitions were astounding; his influence was 
especially potent in giving a philological character to much 
of the work of the Romanticists. In Gottingen he became 
acquainted with one of the most gifted women which Germany has ever produced, Caroline, the daughter of the 
Gottingen professor Michaelis, at the time a young widow 
in the home of her father, and destined to become not only 
his wife, but the Muse of much of his most important work. 
This office she performed until the time of their unfortunate 
separation. 