After finishing his university studies, Wilhelm was for 
a while private tutor in a wealthy family at Amsterdam, 
where conditions of living were most agreeable, but where 
a suitable stimulus to the inborn life of his mind was lacking. He accordingly gave up this position and returned, 
with little but hopes, to Germany. Then came a call which 
was both congenial and honorable. Schiller's attention had 
been drawn, years before, to a review of his own profound 
philosophical poem. The Artists, by an unknown young man, 
whom he at once sought to secure as a regular contributor 
to his literary journal. The New Thalia. Nothing came of 
this, chiefly because of Schlegel's intimate relations to 
Burger at the time. Schiller had published, not long before, 
his annihilatory review of Biirger's poems, which did so 
much to put that poet out of serious consideration for the 
remainder of his days. In the meantime Schiller had 
addressed himself to his crowning enterprise, the establishing of a literary journal which should be the final dictator 
of taste and literary criticism throughout the German-speaking world. In 1794 the plan for The Hours was 
realized under favorable auspices, and in the same year 
occurred the death of Burger. In 1796 Schiller invited 
"Wilhelm to become one of the regular staff of The HourSf 
and this invitation Schlegel accepted, finding in it the opportunity to marry Caroline, with whom he settled in Jena 
in July of that year. His first contribution to The Hours
was a masterful and extended treatise on Dante, which was 
accompanied by translations which were clearly the most 
distinguished in that field which the German language had 
ever been able to offer. Schlegel also furnished elaborated 
poems, somewhat in Schiller's grand style, for the latter 's 
Almanac of the Muses. During the years of his residence 
at Jena (which continued until 1801) Schlegel, with the 
incalculable assistance of his wife, published the first eight 
volumes of those renderings of Shakespeare's plays into 
German which doubtless stand at the very summit of the 
art of transferring a poet to an alien region, and which 
have, in actual fact, served to make the Bard of Avon as 
truly a fellow-citizen of the Germans as of the Britons. " 
Wilhelm's brother Friedrich had remained but a year with 
him in Jena, before his removal to Berlin and his establishment of the Athenceum. Although separated from his 
brother, Wilhelm's part in the conduct of the journal was 
almost as important as Friedrich 's, and, in effect, they conducted the whole significant enterprise out of their own 
resources. The opening essay. The Languages, is Wilhelm's, and properly, for at this time he was by far the 
better versed in philological and literary matters. His cultural acquisitions, his tremendous spoils of reading, were 
greater, and his judgment more trustworthy. In all his 
work in the Athenceum he presents a seasoned, many-sided 
sense of all poetical, phonetic and musical values : rhythm, 
color, tone, the lightest breath and aroma of an elusive 
work of art. One feels that Wilhelm overhauls the whole 
business of criticism, and clears the field for coming literary ideals. Especially telling is his demolition of Klopstock's violent "Northernism," to which he opposes a far 
wider philosophy of grammar and style. 