The universality 
of poetry, as contrasted with a narrow " German " clumsiness, is blandly defended, and a joyous abandon is urged - 
as something better than the meticulous anxiety of chauvinistic partisanism. In all his many criticisms of literature 
there are charm, wit, and elegance, an individuality and
freedom in the reviewer, who, if less penetrating than his 
brother, displays a far more genial breadth and humanity, 
and more secure composure. His translations, more masterly than those of Friedrich, carry out Herder's demand 
for complete absorption and re-creation. 

In 1801 Schlegel went to Berlin, where for three successive winters he lectured on art and literature. His subsequent translations of Calderon's plays (1803-1809) and 
of Romance lyrics served to naturalize a large treasure of 
southern poetry upon German soil. In 1804, after having 
separated from his wife, he became attached to the household of Madame de Stael, and traversed Europe with her. 
It is through this association that she was enabled to 
write her brilliant work. On Germany. In 1808 he delivered a series of lectures on dramatic art and literature 
in Vienna, which enjoyed enormous popularity, and are 
still reckoned the crowning achievement of his career; 
perhaps the most significant of these is his discourse on 
Shakespeare. In the first volume of the Athenaeum, Shakes- 
peare 's universality had already been regarded as " the 
central point of romantic art." As Romanticist, it was 
Schlegel 's office to portray the independent development of 
the modern English stage, and to defend Shakespeare 
against the familiar accusations of barbaric crudity and 
formlessness. In surveying the field, it was likewise incumbent upon him to demonstrate in what respects the classic 
drama differed from the independently developed modern 
play, and his still useful generalization regards antique art 
as limited, clear, simple, and perfected — as typified by a 
work of sculpture; w^hereas romantic art delights in mingling its subjects — as a painting, which embraces many 
objects and looks out into the widest vistas. Apart from 
the clarity and smoothness of these Vienna discourses, 
their lasting merit lies in their searching observation of 
the import of dramatic works from their inner soul, and in 
a most discriminating sense of the relation of all their parts 
to an organic whole.
In 1818 Schlegel accepted a professorship at the University of Bonn, in which place he exercised an incalculable 
influence upon one of the rising stars of German literature, 
young Heinrich Heine, who derived from him (if we may 
judge from his own testimony at the time; Heine's later 
mood is a very different matter) an iiispiration amounting 
to captivation. The brilliant young student discovered 
here a stimulating leader whose wit, finish, and elegance 
responded in full measure to the hitherto unsatisfied cravings of his own nature. Although Heine had become a very 
altered person at the time of writing his Romantic School 
(1836), this book throws a scintillating illumination upon 
certain sides of Schlegel 's temperament, and offers a vivid 
impression of his living personality. 
