In these last decades of his life Schlegel turned, as had 
his younger brother, to the inviting field of Sanskrit literature and philology, and extracted large and important 
treasures which may still be reckoned among mankind's 
valued resources. When all discount has been made on the 
side of a lack of specific gravity in Wilhelm Schlegel's 
character, it is only just to assert that throughout his long 
and prolific life he wrought with incalculable effect upon 
the civilization of modern Europe as a humanizer of the 
first importance. 

Ludwig Tieck (1773-1853) is reckoned by many students 
of the Romantic period to be the best and most lasting 
precipitate which the entire movement has to show. For 
full sixty years a most prolific writer, and occupied in the 
main with purely literary production, it is not strange that 
he came to be regarded as the poetic mouthpiece of the 
school. 

His birth was in a middle-class family of Berlin. A full 
university training at Halle, Gottingen and Erlangen was 
accorded him, during which he cannot be said to have distinguished himself by any triumph in the field of formal 
studies, but in the course of which he assimilated at first 
hand the chief modern languages of culture, without any
professional guidance. At an early stage in his growth 
he discovered and fed full upon Shakespeare. As a university student he also fell in love with the homely lore of 
German folk-poetry. In 1794 he came back to Berlin, and 
turned to rather banal hack-writing for the publisher Nicolai, chief of all exponents of rationalism. Significant was 
his early rehabilitation of popular folk-tales and chap- 
books, as in The Wonderful Love-Story of Beautiful Magelone and Count Peter of Provence (1797). The stuff was 
that of one of the prose chivalry-stories of the middle ages, 
full of marvels, seeking the remote among strange hazards 
by land and sea. The tone of Tieck's narrative is childlike and naive, with rainbow-glows of the bliss of romantic 
love, glimpses of the poetry and symbolism of Catholic 
tradition, and a somewhat sugary admixture of the spirit 
of the Minnelied, with plenty of refined and delicate sensuousness. With the postulate that song is the true language 
of life, the story is sprinkled with lyrics at every turn. 
The whole adventure is into the realm of dreams and vague 
sensations. 

Tieck must have been liberally baptized with Spree-water, for the instantaneous, corrosive Berlin wit was a 
large part of his endowment. His cool irony associated 
him more closely to the Schlegels than to Novalis, with his 
life-and-death consecrations. His absurd play-within-a-play, Puss in Boots (1797), is delicious in its bizarre ragout 
of satirical extravaganzas, where the naive and the ironic 
lie side by side, and where the pompous seriousness of certain complacent standards is neatly excoriated. 