Such publications as the two mentioned were hailed with 
rejoicing by the Schlegels, who at once adopted Tieck as a 
natural ally. Even more after their own hearts was the 
long novel, Franz Sternhald's Wanderings (1798), a vibrant 
confession, somewhat influenced by Wilhelm Meister, of 
the Religion of Art (or the Art of Religion) : " Devout 
worship is the highest and purest joy in Art, a joy of which 
our natures are capable only in their purest and most
exalted hours." Sternbald, a pupil of Albrecht Diirer, 
makes a roving journey to the Low Countries, the Rhine, 
and Italy, in order to deepen his artistic nature. The psychology of the novel is by no means always true to the 
spirit of the sixteenth century; in fact a good part of 
the story reflects aristocratic French chateau-life in the 
eighteenth century. The intensities of romantic friendship give a sustained thrill, and the style is rhythmic, 
though the action is continually interrupted by episodes, 
lyrics, and discourses. In the unworldliness, the delicacy 
of sensibility, and the somewhat vague outlines of the story 
one may be reminded, at times, of The Marble Faun. Its 
defense of German Art, as compared with that of the 
Italian Renaissance, is its chief message. 

This novel has been dwelt upon because of its direct influence upon German painting and religion. A new verb, 
" sternhaldisieren," was coined to parody a new movement 
in German art toward the medieval, religious spirit. It is 
this book which Heine had in mind when he ridiculed 
Tieck's "silly plunge into medieval naivete." Overbeck 
and Cornelius in Rome, with their pre-Raphaelite, old-German and catholicizing tendencies, became the leaders of 
a productive school. Goethe scourged it for its " mysticreligious " aspirations, and demanded a more vigorous, 
cheerful and progressive outlook for German painting. 

Having already formed a personal acquaintance with 
Friedrich Schlegel in Berlin, Tieck moved to Jena in 1799, 
came into very close relations with Fichte, the Schlegels, 
and Novalis, and continued to produce works in the spirit 
of the group, notably the tragedy Life and Death of Saint 
Genoveva (1800). His most splendid literary feat at 
this period, however, was the translation of Don Quixote 
(1799-1801), a triumph over just those subtle difficulties 
which are well-nigh insurmountable, a rendering which 
went far beyond any mere literalness of text, and reproduced the very tone and aura of its original. 
In 1803 he published a graceful little volume of typical
Minnelieder, renewed from the middle high-German period. 
The note of the book (in which Runge's copperplate outlines are perhaps as significant as the poems) is spiritualized sex-love: the utterance of its fragrance and delicacy, 
its unique place in the universe as a pathway to the Divine 
— a point of view to which the modern mind is prone to 
take some exceptions, considering a religion of erotics 
hardly firm enough ground to support an entire philosophy 
of living. All the motives of the old court-lyric are well 
represented — the torments and rewards of love, the charm 
of spring, the refinements of courtly breeding — and the 
sophisticated metrical forms are handled with great virtuosity. Schiller, it is true, compared them to the chatter of 
sparrows, and Goethe also paid his compliments to the 
" sing-song of the Minnesingers," but it was this same 
little book which first gave young Jakob Grimm the wish 
to become acquainted with these poets in their original 
form. 