That eminently "Romantic" play, Emperor Octavian 
(1804), derived from a familiar medieval chap-book, lyric 
in tone and loose in form, is a pure epitome of the movement, and the high-water mark of Tieck's apostleship and 
service. Here Tieck shows his intimate sense of the poetry 
of inanimate nature ; ironic mockery surrenders completely 
to religious devotion; the piece is bathed in — 

The light that never was on sea or land, 
The consecration and the poet's dream. 

It is in the prologue to this play that personified Romance 
declares her descent from Faith, her father, and Love, her 
mother, and introduces the action by the command: 

" Moonshine-lighted magic night 
Holding every sense in thrall; 
World, which wondrous tales recall, 
Rise, in ancient splendors bright ! " 

During a year's residence in Italy Tieck applied himself 
chiefly to reading old-German manuscripts, in the Library

of the Vatican, and wavered upon the edge of a decision to 
devote himself to Germanic philology. The loss to science 
is not serious, for Tieck hardly possessed the grasp and 
security which could have made him a peer of the great 
pioneers in this field. From the time of his leaving for 
Italy, Tieck 's importance for the development of Romanticism becomes comparatively negligible. 

After a roving existence of years, during which he lived 
in Vienna, Munich, Prague and London, he made a settled 
home in Dresden. Here he had an enviable place in the 
very considerable literary and artistic group, and led an 
existence of almost suspiciously " reasonable " well-being, 
from a Romantic view-point. The " dramatic evenings " 
at his home, in which he read plays aloud before a brilliant 
gathering, were a feature of social life. For seventeen 
years he had an influential position as " drama turg " of 
the Royal Theatre, it being his duty to pass on plays to be 
performed and to decide upon suitable actors for the parts. 

During his long residence in Dresden Tieck produced a 
very large number of short stories {Novellen) which had a 
decided vogue, though they differ widely from liis earlier 
writings in dealing with real, contemporary life. 

It is pleasant to record that the evening of Tieck 's long 
life was made secure from anxieties by a call to Berlin 
from Friedrich Wilhelm IV., the " Romantic king." His 
last eleven years were spent there in quiet and peace, disturbed only by having to give dramatic readings before a 
self-sufficient court circle which was imperfectly equipped 
for appreciating the merits of Tieck 's performances. 