In conformity with the plan which we laid down 
at the first, we shall now proceed to treat of 
the English and Spanish theatres. We have 
been, on various occasions, compelled in 
passing to allude cursorily, sometimes to the 
one and sometimes to the other, partly for the sake of 
placing, by means of contrast, many ideas in a clearer light, 
and partly on account of the influence which these stages 
have had on the theatres of other countries. Both the 
English and Spaniards possess a very rich dramatic literature, both have had a number of prolific and highly talented dramatists, among whom even the least admired and 
celebrated, considered as a whole, display uncommon aptitude for dramatic animation and insight into the essence 
of theatrical effect. The history of their theatres has no 
connection with that of the Italians and French, for they 
developed themselves wholly out of the abundance of their 
own intrinsic energy, without any foreign influence: the 
attempts to bring them back to an imitation of the ancients, 
or even of the French, have either been attended with no 
success, or not been made till a late period in the decay of 
the drama. The formation of these two stages, again, is 
equally independent of each other ; the Spanish poets were 
altogether unacquainted with the English ; and in the older 
and most important period of the English theatre I could 
discover no trace of any knowledge of Spanish plays
(though their novels and romances were certainly known), 
and it was not till the time of Charles II. that translations 
from Calderon first made their appearance. 
So many things among men have been handed down from 
century to century and from nation to nation, and the 
human mind is in general so slow to invent, that originality 
in any department of mental exertion is everywhere a rare 
phenomenon. We are desirous of seeing the result of the 
efforts of inventive geniuses when, regardless of what in 
the same line has elsewhere been carried to a high degree 
of perfection, they set to work in good earnest to invent 
altogether for themselves ; when they lay the foundation of 
the new edifice on uncovered ground, and draw all the 
preparations, all the building materials, from their own 
resources. We participate, in some measure, in the joy 
of success, when we see them advance rapidly from their 
first helplessness and need to a finished mastery in their 
art. The history of the Grecian theatre would afford us 
this cheering prospect could we witness its rudest beginnings, which were not preserved, for they were not even 
committed to writing; but it is easy, when we compare 
^schylus and Sophocles, to form some idea of the preceding period. The Greeks neither inherited nor borrowed their dramatic art from any other people; it was 
original and native, and for that very reason was it able 
to produce a living and powerful effect. But it ended with 
the period when Greeks imitated Greeks ; namely, when the 
Alexandrian poets began learnedly and critically to compose dramas after the model of the great tragic writers. 
The reverse of this was the case with the Romans; they 
received the form and substance of their dramas from the 
Greeks ; they never attempted to act according to their own 
discretion, or to express their own way of thinking; and 
hence they occupy so insignificant a place in the history of 
dramatic art. 