Among the nations of modern Europe, the 
English and Spaniards alone (for the German stage is but 
forming) possess as yet a theatre entirely original and national, which, in its own peculiar shape, has arrived at 
maturity. 

Those critics who consider the authority of the ancients, 
as models, to be such that in poetry, as in all the other arts, 
there can be no safety out of the pale of imitation, affirm 
that, as the nations in question have not followed this 
course, they have brought nothing but irregular works on 
the stage, which, though they may possess occasional passages of splendor and beauty, must yet, as a whole, be forever reprobated as barbarous and wanting in form. We 
have already, in the introductory part of these Lectures, 
stated our sentiments generally on this way of thinking; 
but we must now examine the subject somewhat more 
closely. 

If the assertion be well founded, all that distinguishes the 
works of the greatest English and Spanish dramatists, a 
Shakespeare and a Calderon, must rank them far below 
the ancients; they could in no wise be of importance for 
theory, and would at most appear remarkable, on the 
assumption that the obstinacy of these nations in refusing 
to comply with the rules may have afforded a more ample 
field to the poets to display their native originality, though 
at the expense of art. But even this assumption, on a 
closer examination, appears extremely questionable. The 
poetic spirit requires to be limited, that it may move with 
a becoming liberty within its proper precincts, as has been 
felt by all nations on the first invention of metre ; it must 
act according to laws derivable from its own essence, otherwise its strength will evaporate in boundless vacuity. 

The works of genius cannot therefore be permitted to be 
without form; but of this there is no danger. However, 
that we may answer this objection of want of form, we must 
understand the exact meaning of the term " form," since 
most critics, and more especially those who insist on a stiff 
regularity, interpret it merely in a mechanical, and not in 
an organical sense. Form is mechanical when, through 
external force, it is imparted to any material merely as an
accidental addition without reference to its quality ; as, for 
example, when we give a particular shape to a soft mass 
that it may retain the same after its induration. Organical form, again, is innate; it unfolds itself from within, 
and requires its determination contemporaneously with the 
perfect development of the germ. We everywhere discover 
such forms in nature throughout the whole range of living 
powers, from the crystallization of salts and minerals to 
plants and flowers, and from these again to the human 
body. In the fine arts, as well as in the domain of nature, 
the supreme artist, all genuine forms are organical, that is, 
determined by the quality of the work. In a word, the 
form is nothing but a significant exterior, the speaking 
physiognomy of each thing, which, as long as it is not disfigured by any destructive accident, gives a true evidence 
of its hidden essence. 