This appropriate expression was, if we mistake not, first used by M. Adam 
Miiller in his Lectures on German Science and Literature. If, however, he 
gives himself out as the inventor of the thing itself, he is, to use the softest 
word, in error. Long before him other Oermans had endeavored to reconcile 
the contrarieties of taste of different ages and nations, and to pay due homage 
to all genuine poetry and art. Between good and bad, it is true, no reconciliation is possible.
with the rules and with right reason (in the meaning of 
certain critics these terms are equivalent), may be considered as an evidence of merely negative properties. The 
ground of the resemblance lies far deeper, in the inmost 
substance of the fictions and in the essential relations 
through which every deviation of form becomes a true 
requisite, which, together with its validity, has also its 
significance. What they have in common with each other 
is the spirit of the romantic poetry, giving utterance to 
itself in a dramatic shape. However, to explain ourselves 
with due precision, the Spanish theatre, in our opinion, 
down to its decline and fall in the commencement of the 
eighteenth century, is almost entirely romantic; the English is completely so in Shakespeare alone, its founder and 
greatest master ; but in later poets the romantic principle appears more or less degenerated, or is no longer perceivable, 
although the march of dramatic composition introduced by 
virtue of it has been, outwardly at least, pretty generally 
retained. The manner in which the different ways of thinking of the two nations, one a northern and the other a 
southern, have been expressed ; the former endowed with a 
gloomy, the latter with a glowing imagination; the one 
nation possessed of a scrutinizing seriousness disposed to 
withdraw within itself, the other impelled outwardly by 
the violence of passion — the mode in which all this has 
been accomplished will be most satisfactorily explained at 
the close of this section, when we come to institute a parallel 
between Shakespeare and Calderon, the only two poets who 
are entitled to be called great. 

Of the origin and essence of the romantic I treated in my 
first Lecture, and I shall here, therefore, merely briefly 
mention the subject. The ancient art and poetry rigorously separate things which are dissimilar; the romantic 
delights in indissoluble mixtures; all contrarieties — nature 
and art, poetry and prose, seriousness and mirth, recollection and anticipation, spirituality and sensuality, terrestrial and celestial, life and death, are by it blended
in the most intimate combination. As the oldest lawgivers delivered their mandatory instructions and prescriptions in measured melodies; as this is fabulously 
ascribed to Orpheus, the first softener of the yet untamed 
race of mortals ; in like manner the whole of ancient poetry 
and art is, as it were, a rhythmical nomos (law), a 
harmonious promulgation of the permanently established 
legislation of a world submitted to a beautiful order and 
reflecting in itself the eternal images of things. Romantic 
poetry, on the other hand, is the expression of the secret 
attraction to a chaos which lies concealed in the very bosom 
of the ordered universe, and is perpetually striving after 
new and marvelous births ; the life-giving spirit of primal 
love broods here anew on the face of the waters. The 
former is more simple, clear, and like to nature in the selfexistent perfection of her separate works; the latter, notwithstanding its fragmentary appearance, approaches 
nearer to the secret of the universe. For Conception can 
only comprise each object separately, but nothing in truth 
can ever exist separately and by itself; Feeling perceives 
all in all at one and the same time. 