Respecting the two species of poetry with which we 
are here principally occupied, we compared the ancient 
Tragedy to a group in sculpture, the figures corresponding 
to the characters, and their grouping to the action ; and to 
these two, in both productions of art, is the consideration 
exclusively directed, as being all that is properly exhibited. 
But the romantic drama must be viewed as a large picture, 
where not merely figure and motion are exhibited in larger, 
richer groups, but where even all that surrounds the figures 
must also be portrayed ; where we see not merely the nearest objects, but are indulged with the prospect of a considerable distance ; and all this under a magical light which 
assists in giving to the impression the particular character 
desired. 

Such a picture must be bounded less perfectly and less 
distinctly than the group ; for it is like a fragment cut out
    of the optic scene of the world. However, the painter, by 
the setting of his foreground, by throwing the whole of his 
light into the centre, and by other means of fixing the point 
of view, will learn that he must neither wander beyond the 
composition nor omit anything within it. 

In the representation of figure. Painting cannot compete 
with Sculpture, since the former can exhibit it only by a 
deception and from a single point of view ; but, on the other 
hand, it communicates more life to its imitations by colors 
which in a picture are made to imitate the lightest shades 
of mental expression in the countenance. The look, which 
can be given only very imperfectly by Sculpture, enables 
us to read much deeper in the mind and perceive its 
lightest movements. Its peculiar charm, in short, consists 
in this, that it enables us to see in bodily objects what is 
least corporeal, namely, light and air. 

The very same description of beauties are peculiar to the 
romantic drama. It does not (like the Old Tragedy) separate seriousness and the action, in a rigid manner, from 
among the whole ingredients of life; it embraces at once 
the whole of the chequered drama of life with all its circumstances; and while it seems only to represent subjects 
brought accidentally together, it satisfies the unconscious 
requisitions of fancy, buries us in reflections on the inexpressible signification of the objects which we view blended 
by order, nearness and distance, light and color, into one 
harmonious whole; and thus lends, as it were, a soul to 
the prospect before us. 