
The change of time and of place (supposing its influence 
on the mind to be included in the picture and that it comes 
to the aid of the theatrical perspective, with reference to 
what is indicated in the distance, or half-concealed by intervening objects) ; the contrast of gayety and gravity (supposing that in degree and kind they bear a proportion to 
each other) ; finally, the mixture of the dialogical and the 
lyrical elements (by which the poet is enabled, more or 
less perfectly, to transform his personages into poetical

beings) — these, in my opinion, are not mere licenses, but 
true beauties in the romantic drama. In all these points, 
and in many others also, the English and Spanish works, 
which are preeminently worthy of this title of Romantic, 
fully resemble each other, however different they may be in 
other respects. 

Of the two we shall first notice the English theatre, 
because it arrived at maturity earlier than the Spanish. 
In both we must occupy ourselves almost exclusively with 
a single artist, with Shakespeare in the one and Calderon 
in the other; but not in the same order with each, for 
Shakespeare stands first and earliest among the English; 
any remarks we may have to make on earlier or contemporary antiquities of the English stage may be made in a 
review of his history. But Calderon had many predecessors; he is at once the summit and almost the close of 
dramatic art in Spain. 

The wish to speak with the brevity which the limits of 
my plan demand, of a poet to the study of whom I have 
devoted many years of my life, places me in no little embarrassment. I know not where to begin ; for I should never 
be able to end, were I to say all that I have felt and thought 
on the perusal of his works. With the poet, as with the 
man, a more than ordinary intimacy prevents us, perhaps, 
from putting ourselves in the place of those who are first 
forming an acquaintance with him: we are too familiar 
with his most striking peculiarities to be able to pronounce 
upon the first impression which they are calculated to make 
on others. On the other hand, we ought to possess, and 
to have the power of communicating, more correct ideas 
of his mode of procedure, of his concealed or less obvious 
views, and of the meaning and import of his labors, than 
others whose acquaintance with him is more limited. 

Shakespeare is the pride of his nation. A late poet has, 
with propriety, called him " the genius of the British 
isles." He was the idol of his contemporaries during the 
interval, indeed, of puritanical fanaticism, which broke out
in the next generation and rigorously proscribed all liberal 
arts and literature, and, during the reign of the second 
Charles, when his works were either not acted at all, or, if 
so, very much changed and disfigured, his fame was awhile 
obscured, only to shine forth again about the beginning of 
the last century with more than its original brightness; 
but since then it has only increased in lustre with the course 
of time; and for centuries to come (I speak it with the 
greatest confidence) it will, like an Alpine avalanche, continue to gather strength at every moment of its progress. 
Of the future extension of his fame, the enthusiasm with 
which he was naturalized in Germany, the moment that he 
was known, is a significant earnest. In the South of 
Europe, his language and the great difficulty of translating him with fidelity will be, perhaps, an invincible obstacle 
to his general diffusion.