 In England, the greatest actors 
vie with one another in the impersonation of his characters ; 
the printers in splendid editions of his works; and the 
painters in transferring his scenes to the canvas. Like 
Dante, Shakespeare has received the perhaps inevitable 
but still cumbersome honor of being treated like a classical 
author of antiquity. The oldest editions have been carefully collated, and, where the readings seemed corrupt, 
many corrections have been suggested; and the w^hole literature of his age has been drawn forth from the oblivion 
to which it had been consigned, for the sole purpose of 
explaining the phrases and illustrating the allusions of 
Shakespeare. Commentators have succeeded one another 
in such number that their labors alone, with the critical 
controversies to which they have given rise, constitute of 
themselves no inconsiderable library. These labors deserve 
both our praise and gratitude — more especially the historical investigations into the sources from which Shakespeare drew the materials of his plays and also into the previous and contemporary state of the English stage, as well 
as other kindred subjects of inquiry. With respect, however, 
to their merely philological criticisms, I am frequently compelled to differ from the commentators; and where, too, 
considering him simply as a poet, they endeavor to enter 
into his views and to decide upon his merits, I must separate myself from them entirely. I have hardly ever found 
either truth or profundity in their remarks; and these 
critics seem to me to be but stammering interpreters of 
the general and almost idolatrous admiration of his countrymen. There may be people in England who entertain 
the same views of them with myself, at least it is a well-known fact that a satirical poet has represented Shakespeare, under the hands of his commentators, by Actaeon 
worried to death by his own dogs; and, following up the 
story of Ovid, designated a female writer on the great poet 
as the snarling Lycisca. 

We shall endeavor, in the first place, to remove some of 
these false views, in order to clear the way for our own 
homage, that we may thereupon offer it the more freely 
without let or hindrance. 

From all the accounts of Shakespeare which have come 
down to us it is clear that his contemporaries knew well 
the treasure they possessed in him, and that they felt and 
understood him better than most of those who succeeded 
him. In those days a work was generally ushered into the 
world with Commendatory Verses; and one of these, prefixed to an early edition of Shakespeare, by an unknown 
author, contains some of the most beautiful and happy lines 
that were ever applied to any poet.* An idea, however, 
soon became prevalent that Shakespeare was a rude and 
wild genius, who poured forth at random, and without aim 
or object, his unconnected compositions. Ben Jonson, a 
younger contemporary and rival of Shakespeare, who 
labored in the sweat of his brow, but w^th no great success, 
to expel the romantic drama from the English stage and 
to form it on the model of the ancients, gave it as his 
opinion that Shakespeare did not blot enough, and that, as 
he did not possess much school-learning, he owed more to 
nature than to art. The learned, and sometimes rather 
pedantic Milton was also of this opinion, when he says — 

Our sweetest Shakespeare, fancy's child, 
Warbles his native wood-notes wild. 