Yet it is highly honorable to Milton that the sweetness of 
Shakespeare, the quality which of all others has been least 
allowed, was felt and acknowledged by him. The modern 
editors, both in their prefaces, which may be considered 
as so many rhetorical exercises in praise of the poet, and 
in their remarks on separate passages, go still farther. 
Judging them by principles which are not applicable to 
them, not only do they admit the irregularity of his pieces, 
but, on occasion, they accuse him of bombast, of a confused, 
ungrammatical, and conceited mode of writing, and even of 
the most contemptible buffoonery. Pope asserts that he 
wrote both better and worse than any other man. All the 
scenes and passages which did not square with the littleness of his own taste, he wished to place to the account of 
interpolating players; and he was on the right road, had 
his opinion been taken, of giving us a miserable dole of a 
mangled Shakespeare. It is, therefore, not to be wondered 
at if foreigners, with the exception of the Germans latterly, 
have, in their ignorance of him, even improved upon these 
opinions.* They speak in general of Shakespeare's plays 
as monstrous productions, which could have been given to 
the world only by a disordered imagination in a barbarous 
age; and Voltaire crowns the whole with more than usual 
assurance when he observes that Hamlet, the profound 
masterpiece of the philosophical poet, " seems the work of 
a drunken savage." That foreigners, and, in particular, 
Frenchmen, who ordinarily speak the most strange language of antiquity and the middle ages, as if cannibalism 
had been terminated in Europe only by Louis XIV., 
should entertain this opinion of Shakespeare, might be pardonable; but that Englishmen should join in calumniating 
that glorious epoch of their history,* which laid the foundation of their national greatness, is incomprehensible. 
Shakespeare flourished and wrote in the last half of the 
reign of Queen Elizabeth and first half of that of James I. ; 
and, consequently, under monarchs who were learned themselves and held literature in honor. The policy of modern 
Europe, by which the relations of its different states have 
been so variously interwoven with one another, commenced 
a century before. The cause of the Protestants was decided 
by the accession of Elizabeth to the throne ; and the attachment to the ancient belief cannot therefore be urged as a 
proof of the prevailing darkness. Such was the zeal for 
the study of the ancients that even court ladies, and the 
queen herself, were acquainted with Latin and Greek, and 
taught even to speak the former — a degree of knowledge 
which we should in vain seek for in the courts of Europe 
at the present day. The trade and navigation which the 
English carried on with all the four quarters of the world 
made them acquainted with the customs and mental productions of other nations ; and it would appear that they were 
then more indulgent to foreign manners than they are in 
the present day. Italy had already produced nearly all 
that still distinguishes her literature, and, in England, 
translations in verse were diligently, and even successfully, 
executed from the Italian. Spanish literature also was not 
unknown, for it is certain that Don Quixote was read in 
England soon after its first appearance. Bacon, the 
founder of modern experimental philosophy, and of whom 
it may be said that he carried in his pocket all that even 
in this eighteenth century merits the name of philosophy, 
was a contemporary of Shakespeare. His fame as a 
writer did not, indeed, break forth into its glory till after 
his death; but what a number of ideas must have been in 
circulation before such an author could arise! Many 
branches of human knowledge have, since that time, been 
more extensively cultivated, but such branches as are totally 
unproductive to poetry — chemistry, mechanics, manufactures, and rural and political economy — will never 
enable a man to become a poet. I have elsewhere* examined into the pretensions of modern enlightenment, as it is 
called, which looks with such contempt on all preceding 
ages ; I have shown that at bottom it is all small, superficial, 
and unsubstantial. The pride of what has been called " the 
existing maturity of human intensity " has come to a miserable end; and the structures erected by those pedagogues 
of the human race have fallen to pieces like the baby-houses 
of children. 