With regard to the tone of society in Shakespeare's day, 
it is necessary to remark that there is a wide difference 
between true mental cultivation and what is called polish. 
That artificial polish which puts an end to everything like 
free original communication and subjects all intercourse 
to the insipid uniformity of certain rules, was undoubtedly 
wholly unknown to the age of Shakespeare, as in a great 
measure it still is at the present day in England. It possessed, on the other hand, a fulness of healthy vigor, which 
showed itself always with boldness, and sometimes also 
with coarseness. The spirit of chivalry was not yet wholly 
extinct, and a queen, who was far more jealous in exacting 
homage to her sex than to her throne, and who, with her 
determination, wisdom, and magnanimity, was in fact well 
qualified to inspire the minds of her subjects with an ardent 
enthusiasm, inflamed that spirit to the noblest love of glory 
and renown. The feudal independence also still survived 
in some measure; the nobility vied with one another in 
splendor of dress and number of retinue, and every great 
lord had a sort of small court of his own. The distinction 
of ranks was as yet strongly marked — a state of things 
ardently to be desired by the dramatic poet. In conversation they took pleasure in quick and unexpected 
answers ; and the witty sally passed rapidly like a ball from 
mouth to mouth, till the merry game could no longer be 
kept up. This, and the abuse of the play on words (of 
which King James was himself very fond, and we need 
not therefore wonder at the universality of the mode), may, 
doubtless, be considered as instances of a bad taste; but 
to take them for symptoms of rudeness and barbarity 
is not less absurd than to infer the poverty of a people 
from their luxurious extravagance. These strained repartees are frequently employed by Shakespeare, with the 
view of painting the actual tone of the society in his day; 
it does not, however, follow that they met with his approbation; on the contrary, it clearly appears that he held 
them in derision. Hamlet says, in the scene with the 
gravedigger, " By the Lord, Horatio, these three years 
I have taken note of it : the age is grown so picked that the 
toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, 
he galls his kibe." And Lorenzo, in the Merchant of 
Venice, alluding to Launcelot : 

O dear discretion, how his words are suited! 
The fool hath planted in his memory 
An army of good words: and I do know 
A many fools, that stand in better place, 
Garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word 
Defy the matter.