Besides, Shakespeare, in a thousand places, lays great 
and marked stress on a correct and refined tone of society, 
and lashes every deviation from it, whether of boorishness 
or affected foppery; not only does he give admirable discourses on it, but he represents it in all its shades and 
modifications by rank, age, or sex. What foundation is 
there, then, for the alleged barbarity of his age, its 
offences against propriety? But if this is to be admitted 
as a test, then the ages of Pericles and Augustus must also 
be described as rude and uncultivated; for Aristophanes 
and Horace, who were both considered as models of urbanity, display, at times, the coarsest indelicacy. On this subject, the diversity in the moral feeling of ages depends 
on other causes. Shakespeare, it is true, sometimes introduces us to improper company; at others, he suffers 
ambiguous expressions to escape in the presence of women, 
and even from women themselves. This species of indelicacy was probably not then unusual. He certainly did 
not indulge in it merely to please the multitude, for in many 
of his pieces there is not the slightest trace of this sort 
to be found; and in what virgin purity are many of his 
female parts worked out ! When we see the liberties taken 
by other dramatic poets in England in his time, and even 
much later, we must account him comparatively chaste and 
moral. Neither must we overlook certain circumstances 
in the existing state of the theatre. The female parts were 
not acted by women, but by boys ; and no person of the fair 
sex appeared in the theatre without a mask. Under such a 
carnival disguise, much might be heard by them, and much 
might be ventured to be said in their presence, which in 
other circumstances would have been absolutely improper. 
It is certainly to be washed that decency should be observed 
on all public occasions, and consequently also on the stage. 
But even in this it is possible to go too far. That carping 
censoriousness which scents out impurity in every bold 
sally, is, at best, but an ambiguous criterion of purity of 
morals; and beneath this hypocritical guise there often
lurks the consciousness of an impure imagination. The 
determination to tolerate nothing which has the least reference to the sensual relation between the sexes, may 
be carried to a pitch extremely oppressive to a dramatic 
poet and highly prejudicial to the boldness and freedom 
of his compositions. If such considerations were to be 
attended to, many of the happiest parts of Shakespeare's 
plays, for example, in Measure for Measure, and All's 
Well that Ends Well, which, nevertheless, are handled with 
a due regard to decency, must be set aside as sinning 
against this would-be propriety. 

Had no other monuments of the age of Elizabeth come 
down to us than the works of Shakespeare, I should, from 
them alone, have formed the most favorable idea of its 
state of social culture and enlightenment. When those 
who look through such strange spectacles as to see nothing 
in them but rudeness and barbarity cannot deny what I 
have now historically proved, they are usually driven to 
this last resource, and demand, "What has Shakespeare 
to do with the mental culture of his age? He had no share 
in it. Born in an inferior rank, ignorant and uneducated, 
he passed his life in low society, and labored to please a 
vulgar audience for his bread, without ever dreaming of 
fame or posterity." 

In all this there is not a single word of truth, though it 
has been repeated a thousand times. It is true we know 
very little of the poet's life ; and what we do know consists 
for the most part of raked-up and chiefly suspicious 
anecdotes, of about such a character as those which are 
told at inns to inquisitive strangers who visit the birthplace or neighborhood of a celebrated man. Within a very 
recent period some original documents have been brought 
to light, and, among them, his will, which give us a peep 
into his family concerns. 