Smiling with emotion Petrarch opens the collection of his immortal romanzas with a 
prefatory survey. The clever Boccaccio 
talks with flattering courtesy to all women, 
both at the beginning and at the end of his 
opulent book. The great Cervantes too, an old man in 
agony, but still genial and full of delicate wit, drapes the 
motley spectacle of his lifelike writings with the costly 
tapestry of a preface, which in itself is a beautiful and 
romantic painting. 

Uproot a stately plant from its fertile, maternal soil, and 
there will still cling lovingly to it much that can seem 
superfluous only to a niggard. 

But what shall my spirit bestow upon its offspring, which, 
like its parent, is as poor in poesy as it is rich in love ? 

Just one word, a parting trope : It is not alone the royal 
eagle who may despise the croaking of the raven ; the swan, 
too, is proud and takes no note of it. Nothing concerns him 
except to keep clean the sheen of his white pinions. He 
thinks only of nestling against Leda's bosom without hurting her, and of breathing forth into song everything that 
is mortal within him. 

HUMAN beings and what they want and do, 
seemed to me, when I thought of it, like gray, 
motionless figures; but in the holy solitude 
all around me everything was light and color. 
A fresh, warm breath of life and love fanned 
me, rustling and stirring in all the branches of the verdant 
grove. I gazed and enjoyed it all, the rich green, the white 
blossoms and the golden fruit. And in my mind's eye I 
saw, too, in many forms, my one and only Beloved, now as 
a little girl, now as a young lady in the full bloom and 
energy of love and womanhood, and now as a dignified 
mother with her demure babe in her arms. I breathed the 
spring and I saw clearly all about me everlasting youth. 
Smiling I said to myself: " Even if this world is not the 
best and most useful of places, it is certainly the most 
beautiful. " 

From this feeling or thought nothing could have turned 
me, neither general despair nor personal fear. For I believed that the deep secrets of nature were being revealed 
to me ; I felt that everything was immortal and that death 
was only a pleasant illusion. But I really did not think 
very much about it, since I was not particularly in a mood 
for mental synthesis and analysis. But I gladly lost myself 
in all those blendings and intertwinings of joy and pain 
from which spring the spice of life and the flower of feeling — spiritual pleasure as well as sensual bliss. A subtle 
fire flowed through my veins. What I dreamed was not of 
kissing you, not of holding you in my arms ; it was not only 
the wish to relieve the tormenting sting of my desire, and to 
cool the sweet fire by gratification. 