It was not for your 
lips that I longed, or for your eyes, or for your body; no,
it was a romantic confusion of all of these things, a marvelous mingling of memories and desires. All the mysteries of caprice in man and woman seemed to hover about me, 
when suddenly in my solitude your real presence and the 
glowing rapture in your face completely set me afire. Wit 
and ecstasy now began their alternating play, and were the 
common pulse of our united life. There was no less 
abandon than religion in our embrace. I besought you to 
}n.e\d to my frenzy and implored you to be insatiable. And 
yet with calm presence of mind I watched for the slightest 
sign of joy in you, so that not one should escape me to 
impair the harmony. I not only enjoyed, but I felt and 
enjoyed the enjoyment. 

You are so extraordinarily clever, dearest Lucinda, that 
you have doubtless long ere this begun to suspect that this 
is all nothing but a beautiful dream. And so, alas, it is; 
and I should indeed feel very disconsolate about it if I 
could not cherish the hope that at least a part of it may soon 
be realized. The truth of the matter is this : Not long ago 
I was standing by the window — how long I do not know, 
for along with the other rules of reason and morality, I 
completely forgot about the lapse of time. Well, I was 
standing by the window and looking out into the open ; the 
morning certainly deserves to be called beautiful, the air 
is still and quite warm, and the verdure here before me is 
fresh. And even as the wide land undulates in hills and 
dales, so the calm, broad, silvery river winds along in great 
bends and sweeps, until it and the lover's fantasy, cradled 
upon it like the swan, pass away into the distance and lose 
themselves in the immeasurable. My vision doubtless owes 
the grove and its southern color-effect to the huge mass of 
flowers here beside me, among which I see a large number 
of oranges. All the rest is readily explained by psychology. 
It was an illusion, dear friend, all an illusion, all except that, 
not long ago, I was standing by the window and doing nothing, and that I am now sitting here and doing something — 
something which is perhaps little more than nothing, perhaps even less.
I had written thus far to you about the things I had said 
to myself, when, in the midst of my tender thoughts and 
profound feelings about the dramatic connection of our 
embraces, a coarse and unpleasant occurrence interrupted 
me. I was just on the point of unfolding to you in clear 
and precise periods the exact and straightforward history 
of our frivolities and of my dulness. I was going to expound to you, step by step, in accordance with natural laws, 
the misunderstandings that attack the hidden centre of the 
loveliest existence, and to confess to you the manifold 
effects of my awkwardness. I was about to describe the 
apprenticeship of my manhood, a period which, taken as a 
whole or in parts, I can never look back upon without a 
great deal of inward amusement, a little melancholy, and 
considerable self-satisfaction. 