A BIG tear falls upon the holy sheet which I found here 
instead of you. How faithfully and how simply you have 
sketched it, the old and daring idea of my dearest and most 
intimate purpose! In you it has grown up, and in this 
mirror I do not shrink from loving and admiring myself. 
Only here I see myself in harmonious completeness. For 
your spirit, too, stands distinct and perfect before me, not 
as an apparition which appears and fades away again, but 
as one of the forms that endure forever. It looks at me 
joyously out of its deep eyes and opens its arms to embrace 
my spirit. The holiest and most evanescent of those delicate traits and utterances of the soul, which to one who does 
not know the highest seem like bliss itself, are merely the 
common atmosphere of our spiritual breath and life. 

The words are weak and vague. Furthermore, in this 
throng of impressions I could only repeat anew the one 
inexhaustible feeling of our original harmony. A great 
future beckons me on into the immeasurable; each idea 
develops a countless progeny. The extremes of unbridled 
gayety and of quiet presentiment live together within me. 
I remember everything, even the griefs, and all my thoughts 
that have been and are to be bestir themselves and arise
before me. The blood rushes wildly through my swollen 
veins, my mouth thirsts for the contact of your lips, and 
my fancy seeks vainly among the many forms of joy for 
one which might at last gratify my desire and give it rest. 
And then again I suddenly and sadly bethink me of the 
gloomy time when I was always waiting without hope, and 
madly loving without knowing it ; when my innermost being 
overflowed with a vague longing, which it breathed forth 
but rarely in half-suppressed sighs. 

Oh, I should have thought it all a fairy-tale that there 
could be such joy, such love as I now feel, and such a 
woman, who could be my most tender Beloved, my best 
companion, and at the same time a perfect friend. For it 
was in friendship especially that I sought for what I 
wanted, and for what I never hoped to find in any woman. 
In you I found it all, and more than I could wish for ; but 
you are so unlike the rest. Of what custom or caprice calls 
womanly, you know nothing. The womanliness of your 
soul, aside from minor peculiarities, consists in its regarding life and love as the same thing. For you all feeling is 
infinite and eternal; you recognize no separations, your 
being is an indivisible unity. That is why you are so 
serious and so joyous, why you regard everything in such 
a large and indifferent way; that is why you love me, all 
of me, and will surrender no part of me to the state, to 
posterity, or to manly pleasures. I am all yours; we are 
closest to each other and we understand each other. You 
accompany me through all the stages of manhood, from the 
utmost wantonness to the most refined spirituality. In 
you alone I first saw true pride and true feminine humility. 