The most extreme suffering, if it is only surrounded, without separating us, would seem to me nothing but a charming antithesis to the sublime frivolity of our marriage. 
Why should we not take the harshest whim of chance for 
an excellent jest and a most frolicsome caprice, since we, 
like our love, are immortal? I can no longer say my love 
and your love; they are both alike in their perfect mutu-
ality. Marriage is the everlasting unity and alliance of 
our spirits, not only for what we call this world and that 
world, but for the one, true, indivisible, nameless, endless 
world of our entire being, so long as we live. Therefore, if 
it seemed the proper time, I would drain with you a cup 
of poison, just as gladly and just as easily as that last glass 
of champagne we drank together, when I said: "And so 
let us drink out the rest of our lives." With these words 
I hurriedly quaffed the wine, before its noble spirit ceased 
to sparkle. And so I say again, let us live and love. I 
know you would not wish to survive me ; you would rather 
follow your dying husband into his coffin. Gladly and 
lovingly would you iescend into the burning abyss, even 
as the women of India do, impelled by a mad law, the cruel, 
constraining purpose of which desecrates and destroys the 
most delicate sanctities of the will. 

On the other side, perhaps, longing will be more completely realized. I often wonder over it; every thought, 
and whatever else is fashioned within us, seems to be complete in itself, as single and indivisible as a person. One 
thing crowds out another, and that which just now was near 
and present soon sinks back into obscurity. And then 
again come moments of sudden and universal clarity, when 
several such spirits of the inner world completely fuse 
together into a wonderful wedlock, and many a forgotten 
bit of our ego shmes forth in a new light and even illuminates the darkness of the future with its bright lustre. As 
it is in a small way, so is it also, I think, in a large way. 
That which we call a life is for the complete, inner, immortal man only a single idea, an indivisible feeling. And 
for him there come, too, moments of the profoundest and 
, fullest consciousness, when all lives fall together and 
I mingle and separate in a different way. The time is coming when we two shall behold in one spirit that we are 
blossoms of one plant, or petals of one flower. We shall 
then know with a smile that what we now call merely hope 
was really memory.

Do you know how the first seed of this idea germinated in 
my soul before you and took root in yours ! Thus does the 
religion of love weave our love ever and ever more closely 
and firmly together, just as a child, like an echo, doubles 
the happiness of its gentle parents. 