Nothing can part us ; and certainly any separation would 
only draw me more powerfully to you. I bethink me how 
at our last embrace, you vehemently resisting, I burst into 
simultaneous tears and laughter. I tried to calm myself, 
and in a sort of bewilderment I would not believe that I 
was separated from you until the surrounding objects convinced me of it against my will. But then my longing grew 
again irresistible, until on its wings I sank back into your 
arms. Suppose words or a human being to create a misunderstanding between us! The poignant grief would be 
transient and quickly resolve itself into complete harmony. 
How could separation separate us, when presence itself is 
to us, as it were, too present! We have to cool and mitigate the consuming fire with jests, and thus for us the 
most witty of the forms and situations of joy is also the 
most beautiful. One among all is at once the wittiest and 
the loveliest: when we exchange roles and with childish 
delight try to see who can best imitate the other ; whether 
you succeed best with the tender vehemence of a man, or 
I with the yielding devotion of a woman. But, do you know, 
this sweet game has for me quite other charms than its own. 
It is not merely the delight of exhaustion or the anticipation of revenge. I see in it a wonderful and profoundly 
significant allegory of the development of man and woman 
into complete humanity. " * 

That was my dithyrambic fantasy on the loveliest situation in the loveliest of worlds. I know right well what you 
thought of it and how you took it at that time. And I think 
I know just as well what you will think of it and how you 
will take it here, here in this little book, in which you expect 
to find genuine history, plain truth and calm reason; yes,
even morality, the charming morality of love. " How can a 
man wish to write anything which it is scarcely permissible 
to talk about, which ought only to be felt ? " I replied : " If 
a man feels it, he must wish to talk about it, and what a 
man wishes to talk about he may write. " 

I wanted first to demonstrate to you that there exists in 
the original and essential nature of man a certain awkward 
enthusiasm which likes to utter boldly that which is delicate 
and holy, and sometimes falls headlong over its own honest 
zeal and speaks a word that is divine to the point of 
coarseness. 

This apology would indeed save me, but perhaps only at 
the enormous expense of my manhood itself ; for whatever 
you may think of my manhood in particular, you have 
nevertheless a great deal against the sex in general. Meantime I will by no means make common cause with them, but 
will rather excuse and defend my liberty and audacity by 
means of the example of the little innocent Wilhelmina, 
since she too is a lady whom I love most tenderly. So I 
will straightway attempt a little sketch of her character.