When one regards the remarkable child, not from the 
viewpoint of any one-sided theory, but, as is proper, in a 
large, impartial way, one can boldly say — and it is perhaps 
the best thing one could possibly say of her — that for her 
years she is the cleverest person of her time. And that is 
indeed saying a great deal; for how seldom do we find harmonious culture in people two years old? The strongest of 
the many strong proofs of her inward perfection is her 
serene self-complacency. After she has eaten she always 
spreads both her little arms out on the table, and resting 
her cunning head on them with amusing seriousness, she 
makes big eyes and casts cute glances at the family all 
around her. Then she straightens up and with the most 
vivid expression of irony on her face, smiles at her own 
cuteness and our inferiority. She is full of buffoonery and
has a nice appreciation of it. When I imitate her gestures, 
she immediately copies my imitation ; thus we have created 
a mimic language of our own and make each other understand by means of pantomime hieroglyphics. 

For poetry, I think, she has far more inclination than for 
philosophy; so also she likes to ride better than to walk, 
which last she does only in case of necessity. The ugly 
cacophony of our mother-tongue here in the north melts 
on her tongue into the sweet and mellow euphony of Italian 
and Hindu speech. She is especially fond of rhjnues, as of 
everything else that is beautiful ; she never grows tired of 
saying and singing over and over again to herself, one 
after the other, all her favorite little verses — as it were, 
a classic selection of her little pleasures. Poetry binds the 
blossoms of all things together into a light garland, and so 
little Wilhelmina talks in rhyme about regions, times, events, 
persons, toys and things to eat — all mixed together in a 
romantic chaos, every word a picture. And she does all 
that without any qualifications or artistic transitions, which 
after all only aid the understanding and impede the free 
flight of the fancy. 

For her fancy everything in nature is alive and animate. 
I often recall with pleasure the first time she ever saw and 
felt of a doll. She was not more than a year old. A divine 
smile lighted up her little face, as she pressed an affectionate kiss on the painted wooden lips. Surely there lies deep 
in the nature of man an impulse to eat anything he loves, 
to lift to his mouth every new object and there, if possible, 
reduce it to its original, constituent parts. A wholesome 
thirst for knowledge impels him to seize the object, penetrate into its interior and bite it to pieces. On the other 
hand, touching stops at the surface, while grasping affords 
only imperfect, mediate knowledge. Nevertheless it is a 
very interesting spectacle, when a bright child catches sight 
of another child, to watch her feel of it and strive to orient 
herself by means of those antennae of the reason. The 
strange baby creeps quietly away and hides himself, while
the little philosopher follows him up and goes busily on 
with her manual investigation. 