But, to be sure, mind, wit and originality are just as rare 
in children as in adults. All this, however, does not belong 
here, and is leading me beyond the bounds of my purpose. 
For this sketch proposes merely to portray an ideal, an 
ideal which I would ever keep before my eyes, so that in 
this little artistic volmne of beautiful and elegant philosophy I may not wander away from the delicate line of 
propriety; and so that you will forgive me in advance for 
the audacious liberties that I am going to take, or at least 
you will be able to judge them from a higher viewpoint. 

Am I wrong, think you, in seeking for morality in 
children — for delicacy and prettiness of thought and word? 

Now look! Dear little Wilhelmina often finds inexpressible delight in lying on her back and kicking her little legs 
in the air, unconcerned about her clothes or about the 
judgment of the world. If Wilhelmina does that, what is 
there that I may not do, since I, by Heaven, am a man and 
under no obligation to be more modest than this most 
modest of all feminine creatures? Oh, enviable freedom 
from prejudice ! Do you, too, dear friend, cast it from you, 
all the remnants of false modesty ; just as I have often torn 
off your odious clothes and scattered them about in lovely 
anarchy. And if, perhaps, this little romance of my life 
should seem to you too wild, just think to yourself: He 
is only a child — and take his innocent wantonness with 
motherly forbearance and let him caress you. 

If you will not be too particular about the plausibility and 
inner significance of an allegory, and are prepared for as 
much awkwardness in it as one might expect in the confessions of an awkward man, provided only that the costume 
is correct, I should like to relate to you here one of my 
waking dreams, inasmuch as it leads to the same result as 
my sketch of little Wilhelmina.
" Behold, I am my own teacher, and a god hath planted 
all sorts of melodies in my soul." This I may boldly say, 
now that I am not talking about the joyous science of 
poetry, but about the godlike art of idleness. And with 
whom indeed should I rather talk and think about idleness 
than with myself. So I spoke also in that immortal hour 
when my guardian genius inspired me to preach the high 
gospel of true joy and love: "Oh, idleness, idleness! 
Thou art the very soul of innocence and inspiration. The 
blessed spirits do breathe thee, and blessed indeed is he 
who hath and cherisheth thee, thou sacred jewel, thou sole 
and only fragment of godlikeness brought forth by us from 
Paradise. " 

When I thus communed with myself I was sitting, like a 
pensive maiden in a thoughtless romance, by the side of a 
brook, watching the wavelets as they passed. They flowed 
by as smooth and quiet and sentimental as if Narcissus 
were about to see his reflection on the clear surface and 
become intoxicated with beautiful egoism. They might 
also have enticed me to lose myself deeper and deeper in 
the inner perspective of my mind, were not my nature so 
perpetually unselfish and practical that even my speculations never concern themselves about anything but the general good. So I fell to thinking, among other things, while 
my mind was relaxed by a comfortable laziness and my 
limbs by the powerful heat, of the possibility of a lasting 
embrace. I thought out ways of prolonging the time of 
our being together and of avoiding in the future those 
childishly pathetic expressions of pain over sudden parting, and of finding pleasure, as hitherto, in the comic side 
of Fate 's inevitable and unchangeable decree that separate 
we must. And only after the power of my reason, laboring 
over the unattainableness of my ideal, broke and relaxed, 
did I give myself over to a stream of thoughts. I listened 
eagerly to all the motley fairy-tales with which imagination 
and desire, like irresistible sirens in my breast, charmed
my senses. It did not occur to me to criticise the seductive 
illusion as ignoble, although I well knew that it was for the 
most part a beautiful lie. The soft music of the fantasy seemed to fill the gaps in my longing. I gratefully observed 
this and resolved to repeat for us in the future by my own 
inventiveness that which good fortune had given me, and 
to begin for you this poem of truth. And thus the original 
germ of this wonderful growth of caprice and love came 
into being. And just as freely as it sprouted did I intend 
it should grow up and run wild; and never from love of 
order and economy shall I trim off any of its profuse 
abundance of superfluous leaves and shoots. 