Like a wise man of the East, I had fallen into a holy 
lethargy and calm contemplation of the everlasting substances, more especially of yours and mine. Greatness in 
repose, most people say, is the highest aim of plastic art. 
And so, without any distinct purpose and without any unseemly effort, I thought out and bodied forth our everlasting substances in this dignified style. I looked back and 
saw how gentle sleep overcame us in the midst of our 
embrace. Now and then one of us would open an eye, smile 
at the sweet slumber of the other, and wake up just enough 
to venture a jesting remark and a gentle caress. But ere 
the wanton play thus begun was ended, we would both 
sink back into the blissful lap of half-conscious self-forgetfulness. 

With the greatest indignation 1 then thought of the bad 
men who would abolish sleep. They have probably never 
slept, and likewise never lived. Why are gods gods, except 
because they deliberately do nothing; because they understand that art and are masters of it? And how the poets, 
the sages and the saints strive to be like the gods, in that 
respect as in others! How they vie with one another in 
praise of solitude, of leisure, of liberal freedom from care 
and of inactivity! And they are right in doing so; for 
everything that is good and beautiful in life is already 
there and maintains itself by its own strength. Why then
this vague striving and pushing forward without rest or 
goal? Can this storm and stress give form and nourishing 
juice to the everliving plant of humankind, that grows and 
fashions itself in quiet? This empty, restless activity is 
only a bad habit of the north and brings nothing but ennui 
for oneself and for others. And with what does it begin 
and end except with antipathy to the world in general, 
which is now such a common feeling? Inexperienced vanity 
does not suspect that it indicates only lack of reason and 
sense, but regards it as a high-minded discontent with the 
universal ugliness of the world and of life, of which it 
really has not yet the slightest presentiment. It could not 
be otherwise ; for industry and utility are the death-angels 
which, with fiery swords, prevent the return of man into 
Paradise. Only when composed and at ease in the holy 
calm of true passivity can one think over his entire being 
and get a view of life and the world. 
