
How is it that we think and compose at all, except by 
surrendering ourselves completely to the influence of some 
genius? Speaking and fashioning are after all only incidentals in all arts and sciences ; thinking and imagining are 
the essentials, and they are only possible in a passive state. 
To be sure it is intentional, arbitrary, one-sided, but still a 
passive state. The more beautiful the climate we live in, 
the more passive we are. Only the Italians know what it is 
to walk, and only the Orientals to recline. And where do 
we find the human spirit more delicately and sweetly developed than in India? Everywhere it is the privilege of 
being idle that distinguishes the noble from the common; 
it is the true principle of nobility. Finally, where is the 
greater and more lasting enjoyment, the greater power and 
will to enjoy? Among women, whose nature we call passive, or among men, in whom the transition from sudden 
wrath to ennui is quicker than that from good to evil ? 

Satisfied with the enjoyment of my existence, I proposed 
to raise myself above all its finite, and therefore contemptible, aims and objects. Nature itself seemed to confirm me
in this undertaking, and, as it were, to exhort me in many-voiced choral songs to further idleness. And now suddenly 
a new vision presented itself. I imagined myself invisible 
in a theatre. On one side I saw all the well-known boards, 
lights and painted scenery; on the other a vast throng of 
spectators, a veritable ocean of curious faces and sympathetic eyes. In the foreground, on the right, was Prometheus, in the act of fashioning men. He was bound by a 
long chain and was working very fast and very hard. 
Beside him stood several monstrous fellows who were constantly whipping and goading him on. There was also an 
abundance of glue and other materials about, and he was 
getting fire out of a large coal-pan. On the other side was 
a figure of the deified Hercules, with Hebe in his lap. On 
the stage in the foreground a crowd of youthful forms were 
laughing and running about, all of whom were very happy 
and did not merely seem to live. The youngest looked like 
amorettes, the older ones like images of women. But each 
one of them had his own peculiar manner and a striking 
originality of expression; and they all bore a certain resemblance to the Christian painters ' and poets ' idea of the 
devil — one might have called them little Satans. One of 
the smallest said; 

" He who does not despise, cannot respect; one can only 
do either boundlessly, and good tone consists only in playing with men. And so is not a certain amount of malice an 
essential part of harmonious culture? " 

" Nothing is more absurd, " said another, " than when 
the moralists reproach you about your egoism. They are 
altogether wrong; for what god, who is not his own god, 
can deserve respect from man? You are, to be sure, mistaken in thinking that you have an ego ; but if, in the meantime, you identify it with your body, your name and your 
property, you thereby at least make ready a place for it, 
in case by any chance an ego should come." 

"And this Prometheus you can all hold in deep reverence," said one of the tallest. " He has made you all and 
is constantly making more like you. "