HERE is our little Mary! " asked the father. 
" She is playing out upon the green there, 
with our neighbor's boy," replied the mother. 
" I wish they may not run away and 
lose themselves," said he; " they are so 
heedless." 

The mother looked for the little ones, and brought them 
their evening luncheon. " It is warm," said the boy; and 
Mary eagerly reached out for the red cherries. 

" Have a care, children," said the mother, " and do not 
run too far from home, or into the wood; father and I are 
going to the fields." 

Little Andrew answered : " Never fear, the wood 
frightens us; we shall sit here by the house, where there 
are people near us." 

The mother went in, and soon came out again with her 
husband. They locked the door, and turned toward the 
fields to look after their laborers and see their hay-harvest in the meadow. Their house lay upon a little green 
height, encircled by a pretty ring of paling, which likewise 
inclosed their fruit and flower-garden. The hamlet 
stretched somewhat deeper down, and on the other side lay 
the castle of the Count. Martin rented the large farm from 
this nobleman, and was living in contentment with his wife 
and only child; for he yearly saved some money, and had 
the prospect of becoming a man of substance by his industry, for the ground was productive, and the Count not 
illiberal. 
As he walked with his wife to the fields, he gazed cheerfully round, and said : " What a different look this quarter 
has, Brigitta, from the place we lived in formerly! Here 
it is all so green ; the whole village is bedecked with thick-spreading fruit-trees ; the ground is full of beautiful herbs 
and flowers; all the houses are cheerful and cleanly, the 
inhabitants are at their ease: nay, I could almost fancy 
that the woods are greener here than elsewhere, and the 
sky bluer ; and, so far as the eye can reach, you have pleasure and delight in beholding the bountiful Earth. " 

"And whenever you cross the stream," said Brigitta, 
" you are, as it were, in another world, all is so dreary and 
withered ; but every traveler declares that our village is the 
fairest in the country, far or near. " 

"All but that fir-ground," said her husband; " do but 
look back to it, how dark and dismal that solitary spot is 
lying in the gay scene — the dingy fir-trees, with the smoky 
huts behind them, the ruined stalls, the brook flowing past 
with a sluggish melancholy." 

" It is true, " replied Brigitta ; " if you but approach 
that spot, you grow disconsolate and sad, you know not why. 
What sort of people can they be that live there, and keep 
themselves so separate from the rest of us, as if they had 
an evil conscience? " 
