
" A miserable crew, " replied the young farmer ; " gipsies, seemingly, that steal and cheat in other quarters, and 
have their hoard and hiding-place here. I wonder only that 
his lordship suffers them. " 

" Who knows," said the wife, with an accent of pity, 
" but perhaps they may be poor people, wishing, out of 
shame, to conceal their poverty; for, after all, no one can 
say aught ill of them; the only thing is, that they do not 
go to church, and none knows how they live ; for the little 
garden, which indeed seems altogether waste, cannot possibly support them ; and fields they have none. " 

" God knows, " said Martin, as they went along, " what 
trade they follow; no mortal comes to them; for the place 

they live in is as if bewitched and excommunicated, so that 
even our wildest fellows will not venture into it. " 

Such conversation they pursued while walking to the 
fields. That gloomy spot they spoke of lay apart from the 
hamlet. In a dell, begirt with firs, you might behold a hut 
and various dilapidated farm-houses; rarely was smoke seen 
to mount from it, still more rarely did men appear there; 
though at times curious people, venturing somewhat nearer, 
had perceived upon the bench before the hut some hideous 
women, in ragged clothes, dandling in their arms some children equally dirty and ill-favored ; black dogs were running 
up and down upon the boundary; and, at eventide, a man 
of monstrous size was seen to cross the foot-bridge of the 
brook, and disappear in the hut ; then, in the darkness, various shapes were observed, moving like shadows round an 
open fire. This piece of ground, the firs, and the ruined 
hut, formed in truth a strange contrast with the bright 
green landscape, the white houses of the hamlet, and the 
stately new-built castle. 

The two little ones had now eaten their fruit; it came 
into their heads to run races; and the little nimble Mary 
always got the start of the less active Andrew. " It is not 
fair, " cried Andrew at last ; " let us try it for some length, 
then we shall see who wins." 

" As thou wilt, " said Mary ; " only to the brook we must 
not run." 

" No, " said Andrew ; " but there, on the hill, stands the 
large pear-tree, a quarter of a mile from this. I shall run 
by the left, round past the fir-ground ; thou canst try it by 
the right, over the fields ; so we do not meet till we get up, 
and then we shall see which of us is the swifter." 

" Done," cried Mary, and began to run; " for we shall 
not interfere with each other by the way, and my father 
says it is as far to the hill by that side of the gipsies ' house 
as by this. " 
