
Andrew had already started, and Mary, turning to the 
right, could no longer see him. " It is very silly, " said she

to herself; " I have only to take heart, and run along the 
bridge, past the hut, and through the yard, and I shall certainly be first." She was already standing by the brook 
and the clump of firs. " Shall I ? No ; it is too frightful, " 
said she. A little white dog was standing on the farther 
side, and barking with might and main. In her terror, 
Mary thought the dog some monster, and sprang back. 
" Fie ! fie ! " said she, " the dolt is gone half way by this 
time, while I stand here considering. " The little dog kept 
barking, and,, as she looked at it more narrowly, it seemed 
no longer frightful, but, on the contrary, quite pretty; it 
had a red collar round its neck, with a glittering bell ; and 
as it raised its head, and shook itself in barking, the little 
bell sounded with the finest tinkle. " Well, I must risk it ! " 
cried she : " I will run for life ; quick, quick, I am through ; 
certainly to Heaven, they cannot eat me up alive in half a 
minute ! " And with this, the gay, courageous little Mary 
sprang along the foot-bridge; passed the dog, which ceased 
its barking, and began to fawn on her; and in a moment 
she was standing on the other bank, and the black firs all 
round concealed from view her father's house and the rest 
of the landscape. 

But what was her astonishment when here! The loveliest, most variegated flower-garden lay round her; tulips, 
roses, and lilies, were glittering in the fairest colors ; blue 
and gold-red butterflies were wavering in the blossoms; 
cages of shining wire were hung on the espaliers, with 
many-colored birds in them, singing beautiful songs; and 
children in short white frocks, with flowing yellow hair and 
brilliant eyes, were frolicking about; some playing with 
lambkins, some feeding the birds, or gathering flowers and 
giving them to one another ; some, again, were eating cherries, grapes, and ruddy apricots. No hut was to be seen; 
but instead of it, a large fair house, with a brazen door 
and lofty statues, stood glancing in the middle of the space. 
Mary was confounded with surprise, and knew not what to 
think ; but, not being bashful, she went right up to the first
of the children, held out her hand, and wished the little 
creature good evening. 

"Art thou come to visit us, then? " asked the glittering 
child ; " I saw thee running, playing on the other side, but 
thou wert frightened for our little dog. " 

" So you are not gipsies and rogues," exclaimed Mary, 
" as Andrew always told me! He is a stupid thing, and 
talks of much he does not understand." 

" Stay with us, " said the strange little girl ; " thou wilt 
like it well." 

" But we are running a race. " 

" Thou wilt find thy comrade soon enough. There, take 
and eat." 
