
Mary ate, and found the fruit more sweet than any she 
had ever tasted in her life before; and Andrew, and the 
race, and the prohibition of her parents, were entirely forgotten. 

A stately woman, in a shining robe, came toward them, 
and asked about the stranger child. " Fairest lady, " said 
Mary, " I came running hither by chance, and now they 
wish to keep me." 

" Thou art aware, Zerina," said the lady, " that she can 
be here for but a little while; besides, thou shouldst have 
asked my leave." 

" I thought," said Zerina, " when I saw her admitted 
across the bridge, that I might do it; we have often seen 
her running in the fields, and thou thyself hast taken 
pleasure in her lively temper. She will have to leave us 
soon enough." 

" No, I will stay here, " said the little stranger ; " for 
here it is so beautiful, and here I shall find the prettiest 
playthings, and store of berries and cherries to boot. On 
the other side it is not half so grand." 

The gold-robed lady went away with a smile; and many 
of the children now came bounding round the happy Mary 
in their mirth, and twitched her, and incited her to dance;
others brought her lambs, or curious playthings; others 
made music on instruments, and sang to it. 

She kept, however, by the playmate who had first met 
her; for Zerina was the kindest and loveliest of them all. 
Little Mary cried and cried again: " I will stay with you 
forever ; I will stay with you, and you shall be my sisters ; " 
at which the children all laughed, and embraced her. 
" Now, we shall have a royal sport," said Zerina. She 
ran into the palace, and returned with a little golden box, 
in which lay a quantity of seeds, like glittering dust. She 
lifted a few with her little hand, and scattered some grains 
on the green earth. Instantly the grass began to move, 
as in waves ; and, after a few moments, bright rose-bushes 
started from the ground, shot rapidly up, and budded all 
at once, while the sweetest perfume filled the place. Mary 
also took a little of the dust, and, having scattered it, she 
saw white lilies, and the most variegated pinks, pushing up. 
At a signal from Zerina, the flowers disappeared, and 
others rose in their room. " Now, " said Zerina, " look 
for something greater." She laid two pine-seeds in the 
ground, and stamped them in sharply with her foot. Two 
green bushes stood before them. " Grasp me fast," said 
she ; and Mary threw her arms about the slender form. She 
felt herself borne upward; for the trees were springing 
under them with the greatest speed; the tall pines waved 
to and fro, and the two children held each other fast embraced, swinging this way and that in the red clouds of the 
twilight, and kissed each other, while the rest were climbing up and down the trunks with quick dexterity, pushing 
and teasing one another with loud laughter when they met ; 
if any fell down in the press, they flew through the air, 
and sank slowly and surely to the grounei. At length Mary 
was beginning to be frightened; and the other little child 
sang a few loud tones, and the trees again sank do'\\Ti and 
set them on the ground as gently as they had lifted them 
before to the clouds. 
