
They next went through the brazen door of the palace.
Here many fair women, elderly and young, were sitting in 
the round hall, partaking of the fairest fruits and listening 
to glorious invisible music. In the vaulting of the ceiling, 
palms, flowers, and groves stood painted, among w^hich 
little figures of children were sporting and winding in every 
graceful posture; and with the tones of the music, the 
images altered and glowed w^ith the most burning colors; 
now the blue and green were sparkling like radiant light, 
now these tints faded back in paleness, the purple flamed 
up, and the gold took fire; and then the naked children 
seemed to be alive among the flower-garlands, and to draw 
breath and emit it through their ruby-colored lips ; so that 
by turns you could see the glance of their little white teeth, 
and the lighting up of their azure eyes. 

From the hall, a stair of brass led down to a subterranean 
chamber. Here lay much gold and silver, and precious 
stones of every hue shone out between them. Strange vessels stood along the walls, and all seemed filled with costly 
things. The gold was worked into many forms, and glittered with the friendliest red. Many little dwarfs were 
busied in sorting the pieces from the heap, and putting 
them in the vessels ; others, hunch-backed and bandy-legged, 
with long red noses, were tottering slowly along, half -bent 
to the ground, under full sacks, which they bore as millers 
do their grain, and, with much panting, shaking out the 
gold-dust on the ground. Then they darted awkwardly to 
the right and left, and caught the rolling balls that were 
likely to run away ; and it happened now^ and then that one 
in his eagerness upset another, so that both fell heavily 
and clumsily to the ground. They made angry faces, and 
looked askance, as Mary laughed at their gestures and their 
ugliness. Behind them sat an old crumpled little man, 
w^hom Zerina reverently greeted; he thanked her with a 
grave inclination of his head. He held a sceptre in his 
hand, and wore a crown upon his brow, and all the other 
dwarfs appeared to regard him as their master and obey 
his nod.
" What more wanted 1 " asked lie, with a surly voice, as 
the children came a little nearer. Mary was afraid, and 
did not speak ; but her companion answered, they were only 
come to look about them in the chamber. " Still your old 
child-tricks ! " replied the dwarf ; " will there never be 
an end to idleness? " With this, he turned again to his 
employment, kept his people weighing and sorting the 
ingots; some he sent away on errands, some he chid with 
angry tones. 

" Who is the gentleman?" asked Mary. 

" Our Metal-Prince," replied Zerina, as they walked 
along. 

They seemed once more to reach the open air, for they 
were standing by a lake, yet no sun appeared, and they saw 
no sky above their heads. A little boat received them, and 
Zerina steered it diligently forward. It shot rapidly along. 
On gaining the middle of the lake, little Mary saw that 
multitudes of pipes, channels, and brooks were spreading 
from the little sea in every direction. " These waters to 
the right, " said Zerina, " flow beneath your garden, and 
this is why it blooms so freshly ; by the other side we get 
down into the great stream." On a sudden, out of all the 
channels, and from every quarter of the lake, came a crowd 
of little children swimming up; some wore garlands of 
sedge and water-lily; some had red stems of coral, others 
were blowing on crooked shells ; a tumultuous noise echoed 
merrily from the dark shores; among the children might 
be seen the fairest women sporting in the waters, and often 
several of the children sprang about some one of them, and 
with kisses hung upon her neck and shoulders. All saluted 
the stranger; and these steered onward through the revelry out of the lake, into a little river, which grew narrower 
and narrower. At last the boat came aground. The 
strangers took their leave, and Zerina knocked against the 
cliff. This opened like a door, and a female form, all red, 
assisted them to mount. "Are you all brisk here? " inquired Zerina. " They are just at work," replied the other,
" and happy as they could wish ; indeed, the heat is very 
pleasant." 
