
They went up a winding stair, and on a sudden Mary 
found herself in a most resplendent hall, so that, as she 
entered, her eyes were dazzled by the radiance. Flame-colored tapestry covered the walls with a purple glow; and 
when her eye had grown a little used to it, the stranger 
saw, to her astonishment, that, in the tapestry, there were 
figures moving up and dow^n in dancing joyfulness, in form 
so beautiful, and of so fair proportions, that nothing could 
be seen more graceful ; their bodies were as of red crystal, 
so that it appeared as if the blood were visible within them, 
flowing and playing in its courses. They smiled on the 
stranger, and saluted her with various bows; but as Mary 
was about approaching nearer them, Zerina plucked her 
sharply back, crying : " Thou wilt burn thyself, my little 
Mary, for the whole of it is fire." 

Mary felt the heat. " Why do the pretty creatures not 
come out, " asked she, " and play with us ? " 

"As thou livest in the Air," replied the other, " so are 
they obliged to stay continually in Fire, and would faint 
and languish if they left it. Look now, how glad they are, 
how they laugh and shout; those down below spread out 
the fire-floods everywhere beneath the earth, and thereby 
the flowers, and fruits, and wine, are made to flourish; these 
red streams again are to run beside the brooks of water; 
and thus the fiery creatures arc kept ever busy and glad. 
But for thee it is too hot here ; let us return to the garden. " 

In the garden, the scene had changed since they left it. 
The moonshine was lying on every flower; the birds were 
silent, and the children were asleep in complicated groups, 
among the green groves. Mary and her friend, however, 
did not feel fatigue, but walked about in the warm summer 
night, in abundant talk, till morning. 

When the day dawned, they refreshed themselves on 
fruit and milk, and Mary said : " Suppose we go, by way 
of change, to the firs, and see how things look there? "
" With all my heart," replied Zerina; " thou wilt see our 
watchmen, too, and they will surely please thee; they are 
standing up among the trees on the mound." The two 
proceeded through the flower-gardens by pleasant groves, 
full of nightingales; then they ascended vine-hills; and at 
last, after long following the windings of a clear brook, 
arrived at the firs and the height which bounded the 
domain. " How does it come, " asked Mary, " that we have 
to walk so far here, when, without, the circuit is so 
narrow? " 

" I know not," said her friend; " but so it is." 

They mounted to the dark firs, and a chill wind blew from 
without in their faces; a haze seemed lying far and wide 
over the landscape. On the top were many strange forms 
standing, with mealy, dusty faces, their misshapen heads 
not unlike those of white owls; they were clad in folded 
cloaks of shaggy wool ; they held umbrellas of curious skins 
stretched out above them; and they waved and fanned 
themselves incessantly with large bat's wings, which flared 
out curiously beside the woolen roquelaures. " I could 
laugh, yet I am frightened," cried Mary. 
