
" These are our good trusty watchmen," said her playmate ; " they stand here and wave their fans, that cold 
anxiety and inexplicable fear may fall on every one that 
attempts to approach us. They are covered so, because 
without it is now cold and rainy, which they cannot bear. 
But snow, or wind, or cold air, never reaches down to us; 
here is an everlasting spring and summer: yet if these 
poor people on the top were not frequently relieved, they 
would certainly perish." 

" But who are you, then? " inquired Mary, while again 
descending to the flowery fragrance ; " or have you no name 
at all?" 

" We are called the Elves, " replied the friendly child ; 
" people talk about us on the Earth, as I have heard." 

They now perceived a mighty bustle on the green. " The 
fair Bird is come ! " cried the children to them : all hastened 
to the hall. Here, as they approached, young and old were
crowding over the threshold, all shouting for joy; and from 
within resounded a triumphant peal of music. Having 
entered, they perceived the vast circuit filled with the most 
varied forms, and all were looking upward to a large Bird 
with gleaming plumage, that was sweeping slowly round in 
the dome, and in its stately flight describing many a circle. 
The music sounded more gaily than before ; the colors and 
lights alternated more rapidly. At last the music ceased; 
and the Bird, with a rustling noise, floated down upon a 
glittering crown that hung hovering in air under the high 
window by which the hall was lighted from above. His 
plumage was purple and green, and shining golden streaks 
played through it; on his head there waved a diadem of 
feathers, so resplendent that they sparkled like jewels. His 
bill was red, and his legs of a flashing blue. As he moved, 
the tints gleamed through each other, and the eye was 
charmed with their radiance. His size was as that of an 
eagle. But now he opened his glittering beak ; and sweetest 
melodies came pouring from his moved breast, in finer 
tones than the lovesick nightingale gives forth; still 
stronger rose the song, and streamed like floods of Light, 
so that all, the very children themselves, were moved by it 
to tears of joy and rapture. When he ceased, all bowed 
before him; he again flew round the dome in circles, then 
darted through the door, and soared into the light heaven, 
where he shone far up like a red point, and then soon vanished from their eyes. 

" Why are ye all so glad ? " inquired Mary, bending to 
her fair playmate, who seemed smaller than yesterday. 

" The King is coming ! " said the little one ; " many of 
us have never seen him, and whithersoever he turns his 
face, there are happiness and mirth; we have long looked 
for him, more anxiously than you look for spring when 
winter lingers with you ; and now he has announced, by his 
fair herald, that he is at hand. This wise and glorious 
Bird, that has been sent to us by the King, is called Phcenix ; 
he dwells far off in Arabia, on a tree — there is no other
that resembles it on Earth, as in like manner there is 
no second Phoenix. When he feels himself grown old, he 
builds a pile of balm and incense, kindles it, and dies singing; and then from the fragrant ashes soars up the renewed 
Phoenix, with unlessened beauty. It is seldom he so wings 
his course that men behold him ; and when once in centuries 
this does occur, they note it in their annals, and expect 
remarkable events. But now, my friend, thou and I must 
part; for the sight of the King is not permitted thee." 
