
Then the lady with the golden robe came through the 
throng, and beckoning Mary to her, led her into a sequestered walk. " Thou must leave us, my dear child," said 
she; " the King is to hold his court here for twenty years, 
perhaps longer; and fruitfulness and blessings will spread 
far over the land, but chiefly here beside us ; all the brooks 
and rivulets will become more bountiful, all the fields and 
gardens richer, the wine more generous, the meadows more 
fertile, and the woods more fresh and green; a milder air 
will blow, no hail shall hurt, no flood shall threaten. Take 
this ring, and think of us-; but beware of telling any one 
of our existence or we must fly this land, and thou and all 
around will lose the happiness and blessing of our neighborhood. Once more, kiss thy playmate, and farewell." 
They issued from the walk; Zerina wept, Mary stooped to 
embrace her, and they parted. Already she was on the 
narrow bridge ; the cold air was blowing on her back from 
the firs; the little dog barked with all its might, and rang 
its little bell ; she looked round, then hastened over, for the 
darkness of the firs, the bleakness of the ruined huts, the 
shadows of the twilight, were filling her with terror. 

" What a night my parents must have had on my 
account! " said she within herself, as she stepped on the 
green; " and I dare not tell them where I have been, or 
what wonders I have witnessed, nor indeed would they 
believe me. " Two men passing by saluted her, and as they 
went along, she heard them say : " What a pretty girl ! 
Where can she have come from? " With quickened steps
she approached the house ; but the trees which were hanging 
last night loaded with fruit were now standing dry and 
leafless ; the house was differently painted, and a new barn 
had been built beside it. Mary was amazed, and thought 
she must be dreaming. In this perplexity she opened the 
door; and behind the table sat her father, between an unknown woman and a stranger youth. " Good God ! Father, " 
cried she, " where is my mother ? " 

" Thy mother ! " said the woman, with a forecasting tone, 
and sprang toward her : " Ha, thou surely canst not — 
yes, indeed, indeed thou art my lost, long-lost, dear, only 
Mary! " She had recognized her by a little brown mole 
beneath the chin, as well as by her eyes and shape. All 
embraced her, all were moved with joy, and the parents 
wept. Mary was astonished that she almost reached to 
her father's stature; and she could not understand how her 
mother had become so changed and faded; she asked the 
name of the stranger youth. "It is our neighbor's 
Andrew," said Martin. " How comest thou to us again, so 
unexpectedly, after seven long years? Where hast thou 
been? Why didst thou never send us tidings of thee? " 

" Seven years! " said Mary, and could not order her 
ideas and recollections. " Seven whole years? " 

"Yes, yes," said Andrew, laughing, and shaking her 
trustfully by the hand ; " I have won the race, good Mary ; 
I was at the pear-tree and back again seven years ago, and 
thou, sluggish creature, art but just returned! " 

They again asked, they pressed her; but remembering 
her instruction, she could answer nothing. It was they 
themselves chiefly that, by degrees, shaped a story for her : 
How, having lost her way, she had been taken up by a 
coach, and carried to a strange remote part, where she 
could not give the people any notion of her parents' residence; how she was conducted to a distant town, where 
certain worthy persons brought her up, and loved her ; how 
they had lately died, and at length she had recollected her 
birthplace, and so returned. " No matter how it is!"