
Andrew waited supper, and Mary could not be at home in 
anything she saw. The house seemed small and dark; she 
felt astonished at her dress, which was clean and simple, 
but appeared quite foreign; she looked at the ring on her 
finger, and the gold of it glittered strangely, inclosing a 
stone of burning red. To her father's question, she replied 
that the ring also was a present from her benefactors. 

She was glad when the hour of sleep arrived, and she 
hastened to her bed. Next morning she felt much more 
collected; she had now arranged her thoughts a little, and 
could better stand the questions of the people in the village, 
all of whom came in to bid her welcome. Andrew was there 
too with the earliest, active, glad, and serviceable beyond 
all others. The blooming maiden of fifteen had made a 
deep impression on him; he had passed a sleepless night. 
The people of the castle likewise sent for Mary, and she 
had once more to tell her story to them, which was now 
grown quite familiar to her. The old Count and his Lady 
were surprised at her good breeding; she was modest, but 
not embarrassed; she made answer courteously in good 
phrases to all their questions ; all fear of noble persons and 
their equipage had passed away from her; for when she 
measured these halls and forms by the wonders and the 
high beauty she had seen with the Elves in their hidden 
abode, this earthly splendor seemed but dim to her, the 
presence of men was almost mean. The young lords were 
charmed with her beauty. 

It was now February. The trees were budding earlier 
than usual; the nightingale had never come so soon; the 
spring rose fairer in the land than the oldest men could 
recollect it. In every quarter, little brooks gushed out to 
irrigate the pastures and meadows; the hills seemed heaving, the vines rose higher and higher, the fruit-trees blossomed as they had never done; and a swelling fragrant 
blessedness hung suspended heavily in rosy clouds over
the scene. All prospered beyond expectation : no rude day, 
no tempest injured the fruits ; the wine flowed blushing in 
immense grapes ; and the inhabitants of the place felt astonished, and were captivated as in a sweet dream. The next 
year was like its foi*erunner; but men had now become 
accustomed to the marvelous. In autumn, Mary yielded 
to the pressing entreaties of Andrew and her parents ; she 
was betrothed to him, and in winter they were married. 

She often thought with inward longing of her residence 
behind the fir-trees; she continued serious and still. Beautiful as all that lay around her was, she knew of something 
yet more beautiful; and from the remembrance of this a 
faint regret attuned her nature to soft melancholy. It 
smote her painfully when her father and mother talked 
about the gipsies and vagabonds that dwelt in the dark 
spot of ground. Often she was on the point of speaking 
out in defense of those good beings, whom she knew to be 
the benefactors of the land; especially to Andrew, who 
appeared to take delight in zealously abusing them; yet 
still she repressed the W'Ord that was struggling to escape 
her bosom. So passed this year; in the next, she was 
solaced by a little daughter, whom she named Elfrida, 
thinking of the designation of her friendly Elves. 

The young people lived with Martin and Brigitta, the 
house being large enough for all, and helped their parents 
in conducting their now extended husbandry. The little 
Elfrida soon displayed peculiar faculties and gifts ; for she 
could walk at a very early age, and could speak perfectly 
before she was a twelvemonth old; and after some few 
years she had become so wise and clever, and of such wondrous beauty, that all people regarded her with astonishment, and her mother could not banish the thought that 
her child resembled one of those shining little ones in the 
space behind the Firs. 
