
Elfrida cared not to be with other 
children, but seemed to avoid, wdtli a sort of horror, their 
tumultuous amusements, and liked best to be alone. She 
would then retire into a corner of the garden, and read, or
work diligently with her needle; often also you might see 
her sitting, as if deep in thought, or impetuously walking 
up and down the alleys, speaking to herself. Her parents 
readily allowed her to have her will in these things, for she 
was healthy, and waxed apace ; only her strange sagacious 
answers and observations often made them anxious. " Such 
wise children do not grow to age," her grandmother, Brigitta, many times observed ; " they are too good for this 
world; the child, besides, is beautiful beyond nature, and 
will never find her proper place on Earth." 

The little girl had this peculiarity, that she was very 
loath to let herself be served by any one, but endeavored 
to do everything herself. She was almost the earliest riser 
in the house; she washed herself carefully, and dressed 
without assistance; at night she was equally careful; she 
took special heed to pack up her clothes and belongings with 
her own hands, allowing no one, not even her mother, to 
meddle with her articles. The mother humored her in this 
caprice, not thinking it of any consequence. But what was 
her astonishment, when, happening one holiday to insist, 
regardless of Elfrida's tears and screams, on dressing her 
out for a visit to the castle, she found upon her breast, suspended by a string, a piece of gold of a strange form, 
which she directly recognized as one of the sort she had 
seen in such abundance in the subterranean vaults! The 
little thing was greatly frightened, and at last confessed 
that she had found it in the garden, and, as she liked it 
much, had kept it carefully ; she at the same time prayed so 
earnestly and pressingly to have it back that Mary fastened 
it again in its former place, and, full of thoughts, went out 
with her in silence to the castle. 

Sideward from the farm-house lay some offices for the 
storing of produce and implements ; and behind these there 
was a little green, with an old arbor, now visited by no one, 
as, from the new arrangement of the buildings, it lay too 
far from the garden. In this solitude Elfrida delighted 
most; and it occurred to nobody to interrupt her here, so
that frequently her parents did not see her for half a day. 
One afternoon her mother chanced to be in these buildings, 
seeking for some lost article among the lumber; and she 
noticed that a beam of light was coming in, through a chink 
in the wall. She took a thought of looking through this 
aperture, and seeing what her child was busied with ; and 
it happened that a stone was lying loose, and could be 
pushed aside, so that she obtained a view right into the 
arbor. Elfrida was sitting there on a little bench, and 
beside her the well-known Zerina; and the children were 
playing and amusing each other, in the kindliest unity. 
The Elf embraced her beautiful companion, and said mournfully: "Ah! dear little creature, as I sport with thee, so 
have I sported with thy mother, when she was a child ; but 
you mortals so soon grow tall and thoughtful ! It is very 
hard ; wert thou but to be a child as long as I ! "