Toward the middle of the sixteenth century 
there lived on the banks of the river Havel 
a horse-dealer by the name of Michael Kohlhaas, the son of a school-master, one of the 
most upright and, at the same time, one of 
the most terrible men of his day. Up to his thirtieth year 
this extraordinary man would have been considered the 
model of a good citizen. In a village which still bears his 
name, he owned a farmstead on which he quietly supported 
himself by plying his trade. The children with whom his 
wife presented him were brought up in the fear of God, 
and taught to be industrious and honest ; nor was there one 
among his neighbors who had not enjoyed the benefit of 
his kindness or his justice. In short, the world would have 
had every reason to bless his memory if he had not carried 
to excess one virtue — his sense of justice, which made of 
\him a robber and a murderer. 

He rode abroad once with a string of young horses, all 
well fed and glossy-coated, and was turning over in his 
mind how he would employ the profit that he hoped to 
make from them at the fairs ; part of it, as is the way with 
good managers, he would use to gain future profits, but 
he would also spend part of it in the enjoyment of the 
present. While thus engaged he reached the Elbe, and 
near a stately castle, situated on Saxon territory, he came 
upon a toll-bar which he had never found on this road 
before. Just in the midst of a heavy shower he halted with 
his horses and called to the toll-gate keeper, who soon after 
showed his surly face at the window. The horse-dealer 
told him to open the gate. " What new arrangement is 
this? " he asked, when the toll-gatherer, after some time, 
finally came out of the house. 

" Seignorial privilege " answered the latter, unlocking 
the gate, " conferred by the sovereign upon Squire Wenzel 
Tronka." 

" Is that so? " queried Kohlhaas; " the Squire's name is 
now Wenzel? " and gazed at the castle, the glittering battlements of which looked out over the field. " Is the old 
gentleman dead? " 

" Died of apoplexy," answered the gate keeper, as he 
raised the toll-bar. 

"Hum! Too bad! " rejoined Kohlhaas. "An estimable 
old gentleman he was, who liked to watch people come and 
go, and helped along trade and traffic wherever he could. 
He once had a causeway built because a mare of mine had 
broken her leg out there on the road leading to the village. 
Well, how much is it? " he asked, and with some trouble 
got out the few groschen demanded by the gate keeper from 
under his cloak, which was fluttering in the wind. " Yes, 
old man," he added, picking up the leading reins as the 
latter muttered " Quick, quick! " and cursed the weather; 
" if this tree had remained standing in the forest it would 
have been better for me and for you. " With this he gave 
him the money, and started to ride on. 

He had hardly passed under the toll-bar, however, when 
a new voice cried out from the tower behind him, " Stop 
there, horse-dealer! " and he saw the castellan close a 
window and come hurrying down to him. " Well, I wonder 
what he wants ! " Kohlhaas asked himself, and halted with 
his horses. Buttoning another waistcoat over his ample 
body, the castellan came up to him and, standing with his 
back to the storm, demanded his passport. 
