
" My passport? " queried Kohlhaas. Somewhat disconcerted, he replied that he had none, so far as he knew, but
that, if some one would just describe to him what in the 
name of goodness this was, perhaps he might accidentally 
happen to have one about him. The castellan, eying him 
askance, retorted that without an official permit no horse-dealer was allowed to cross the border with horses. The 
horse-dealer assured him that seventeen times in his life 
he had crossed the border without such a permit; that he 
was well acquainted mth all the official regulations which 
applied to his trade; that this would probably prove to be 
only a mistake; the castellan would please consider the 
matter and, since he had a long day's journey before him, 
not detain him here unnecessarily any longer. But the 
castellan answered that he was not going to slip through 
the eighteenth time, that the ordinance concerning this matter had been only recently issued, and that he must either 
procure the passport here or go back to the place from 
which he had come. After a moment 's reflection, the horse-dealer, who was beginning to feel bitter, got down from 
his horse, turned it over to a groom, and said that he would 
speak to Squire Tronka himself on the subject. He really 
did walk toward the castle; the castellan followed him, 
muttering something about niggardly money-grubbers, and 
what a good thing it was to bleed them; and, measuring 
each other with their glances, the two entered the castle-hall. 

It happened that the Squire was sitting over his wine 
with some merry friends, and a joke had caused them all 
to break into uproarious laughter just as Kohlhaas approached him to make his complaint. The Squire asked 
what he wanted ; the young nobles, at sight of the stranger, 
became silent; but no sooner had the latter broached his 
request concerning the horses, than the whole group cried 
out, " Horses! Where are they I " and hurried over to the 
window to look at them. When they saw the glossy string, 
they all followed the suggestion of the Squire and flew down 
into the courtyard. The rain had ceased ; the castellan, the 
steward, and the servant gathered round them and all
scanned the horses. One praised a bright bay with a white 
star on its forehead, another preferred a chestnut, a third 
patted the dappled horse with tawny spots ; and all were of 
the opinion that the horses were like deer, and that no finer 
were raised in the country. Kohlhaas answered cheerily 
that the horses were no better than the knights who were to 
ride them, and invited the men to buy. The Squire, who 
eagerly desired the big bay stallion, went so far as to ask 
its price, and the steward urged him to buy a pair of black 
horses, which he thought he could use on the farm, as they 
were short of horses. But when the horse-dealer had 
named his price the young knights thought it too high, and 
the Squire said that Kohlhaas would have to ride in search 
of the Round Table and King Arthur if he put such a high 
value on his horses. Kohlhaas noticed that the castellan 
and the steward were whispering together and casting significant glances at the black horses the while, and, moved 
by a vague presentiment, made every effort to sell them the 
horses. He said to the Squire, " Sir, I bought those black 
horses six months ago for twenty-five gold gulden ; give me 
thirty and you shall have them. " Two of the young noblemen who were standing beside the Squire declared quite 
audibly that the horses were probably worth that much; 
but the Squire said that while he might be willing to pay 
out money for the bay stallion he really should hardly care 
to do so for the pair of blacks, and prepared to go in. 
Whereupon Kohlhaas, saying that the next time he came 
that way with his horses they might perhaps strike a bargain, took leave of the Squire and, seizing the reins of his 
horse, started to ride away. 
