
At this moment the castellan stepped forth from the 
crowd and reminded him that he would not be allowed to 
leave without a passport. Kohlhaas turned around and 
inquired of the Squire whether this statement, which meant 
the ruin of his whole trade, were indeed correct. The 
Squire, as he went off, answered with an embarrassed air, 
" Yes, Kohlhaas, you must get a passport. Speak to the
castellan about it, and go your way." Kohlhaas assured 
him that he had not the least intention of evading the 
ordinances which might be in force concerning the exportation of horses. He promised that when he went through 
Dresden he would take out the passport at the chancery, 
and begged to be allowed to go on, this time, as he had 
known nothing whatever about this requirement. " Well ! " 
said the Squire, as the storm at that moment began to rage 
again and the Avind blustered about his scrawny legs ; 'Met 
the wretch go. Come ! " he added to the young knights, 
and, turning around, started toward the door. The castellan, facing about toward the Squire, said that Kohlhaas 
must at least leave behind some pledge as security that he 
would obtain the passport. The Squire stopped again 
under the castle gate. Kohlhaas asked how much security 
for the black horses in money or in articles of value he 
would be expected to leave. The steward muttered in his 
beard that he might just as well leave the blacks themselves. 

" To be sure," said the castellan; " that is the best plan; 
as soon as he has taken out the passport he can come and 
get them again at any time. " Kohlhaas, amazed at such a 
shameless demand, told the Squire, who was holding the 
skirts of his doublet about him for warmth, that what he 
wanted to do was to sell the blacks ; but as a gust of wind 
just then blew a torrent of rain and hail through the gate, 
the Squire, in order to put an end to the matter, called out, 
" If he won 't give up the horses, throw him back again over 
the toll-bar ; " and with that he went off. 

The horse-dealer, who saw clearly that on this occasion 
he would have to yield to superior force, made up his mind 
to comply with the demand, since there really was no other 
way out of it. He unhitched the black horses and led them 
into a stable Miiich the castellan pointed out to him. He 
left a groom in charge of them, provided him with money, 
warned him to take good care of the horses until he came 
back, and with the rest of the string continued his journey 
to Leipzig, where he purposed to go to the fair. As he
rode along he wondered, in half uncertainty, whether after 
all such a law might not have been passed in Saxony for 
the protection of the newly started industry of horse-raising. 

On his arrival in Dresden, where, in one of the suburbs 
of the city, he owned a house and stable — this being the 
headquarters from which he usually conducted his business 
at the smaller fairs around the country — he went immediately to the chancery. And here he learned from the 
councilors, some of whom he knew, that indeed, as his first 
instinct had already told him, the story of the passport 
was only made up. At Kohlhaas's request, the annoyed 
councilors gave him a written certificate of its baselessness, 
and the horse-dealer smiled at the lean Squire's joke, 
although he did not quite see what purpose he could have 
had in view. A few weeks later, having sold to his satisfaction the string of horses he had with him, Kohlhaas returned 
to Tronka Castle harboring no other resentment save that 
caused by the general misery of the world. 
