
The castellan, to whom he showed the certificate, made no 
comment upon it, and to the horse-dealer's question as to 
whether he could now have his horses back, replied that he 
need only go down to the stable and get them. But even 
while crossing the courtyard, Kohlhaas learned with dismay that for alleged insolence his groom had been cudgeled 
and dismissed in disgrace a few days after being left behind at Tronka Castle. Of the boy who informed him of 
this he inquired what in the world the groom had done, and 
who had taken care of the horses in the mean time ; to this 
the boy answered that he did not know, and then opened 
to the horse-dealer, whose heart was already full of misgivings, the door of the stable in which the horses stood. 
How great, though, was his astonishment when, instead of 
his two glossy, well-fed blacks, he spied a pair of lean, 
worn-out jades, with bones on which one could have hung 
things as if on pegs, and with mane and hair matted 
together from lack of care and attention — in short, the
very picture of utter misery in the animal kingdom ! Kohlhaas, at the sight of whom the horses neighed and moved 
feebly, was extremely indignant, and asked what had happened to his horses. The boy, who was standing beside 
him, answered that they had not suffered any harm, and 
that they had had proper feed too, but, as it had been 
harvest time, they had been used a bit in the fields because 
there weren't draught animals enough. Kohlhaas cursed 
over the shameful, preconcerted outrage ; but realizing that 
he was powerless he suppressed his rage, and, as no other 
course lay open to him, was preparing to leave this den of 
thieves again with his horses when the castellan, attracted 
by the altercation, appeared and asked what was the 
matter. 

" What's the matter? " echoed Kohlhaas. " Who gave 
Squire Tronka and his people permission to use for work 
in the fields the black horses that I left behind with him? 
He added, " Do you call that humane ? " and trying to rouse 
the exhausted nags with a switch, he showed him that they 
did not move. The castellan, after he had watched him for 
a while with an expression of defiance, broke out, " Look at 
the ruffian! Ought not the churl to thank God that the 
jades are still alive? " He asked who would have been 
expected to take care of them when the groom had run 
away, and whether it were not just that the horses should 
have worked in the fields for their feed. He concluded by 
sajdng that Kohlhaas had better not make a rumpus or he 
would call the dogs and with them would manage to restore 
order in the courtyard. 

The horse-dealer's heart thumped against his doublet. 
He felt a strong desire to throw the good-for-nothing, potbellied scoundrel into the mud and set his foot on his copper-colored face. But his sense of justice, which was as 
delicate as a gold-balance, still wavered; he was not yet 
quite sure before the bar of his own conscience whether his 
adversary were really guilty of a crime. And so, swallowing the abusive words and going over to the horses, he
silently pondered the circumstances while arranging their 
manes, and asked in a subdued voice for what fault the 
groom had been turned out of the castle. The castellan 
replied, " Because the rascal was insolent in the courtyard ; because he opposed a necessary change of stables and 
demanded that the horses of two young noblemen, who 
came to the castle, should, for the sake of his nags, be left 
out on the open high-road over night." 
