
Kohlhaas would have given the value of the horses if 
he could have had the groom at hand to compare his 
statement -vvdth that of this thick-lipped castellan. He was 
still standing, straightening the tangled manes of the black 
horses, and wondering what could be done in the situation 
in which he found himself, when suddenly the scene 
changed, and Squire "Wenzel Tronka, returning from hare-hunting, dashed into the courtyard, followed by a swarm 
of knights, grooms, and dogs. The castellan, when asked 
what had happened, immediately began to speak, and while, 
on the one hand, the dogs set up a murderous howl at the 
sight of the stranger, and, on the other, the knights sought 
to quiet them, he gave the Squire a maliciously garbled 
account of the turmoil the horse-dealer was making because 
his black horses had been used a little. He said, with a 
scornful laugh, that the horse-dealer refused to recognize 
the horses as his own. 

Kohlhaas cried, " Your worship, those are not my horses. 
Those are not the horses which were worth thirty gold 
gulden! I want my well-fed, sound horses back again! " 

The Squire, whose face grew momentarily pale, got down 

from his horse and said, " If the d d scoundrel doesn't 

want to take the horses back, let him leave them here. 
Come, Gunther! " he called; " Hans, come! " He brushed 
the dust off his breeches with his hand and, just as he 
reached the door mth the young knights, called " Bring 
wine ! " and strode into the house. 

Kohlhaas said that he would rather call the knacker and 
have his horses thrown into the carrion pit than lead them
back, in that condition, to his stable at Kohlhaasenbriick. 
Without bothering himself further about the nags, he left 
them standing where they were, and, declaring that he 
should know how to get his rights, mounted his bay horse 
and rode away. 

He was already galloping at full speed on the road to 
Dresden when, at the thought of the groom and of the complaint which had been made against him at the castle, he 
slowed down to a walk, and, before he had gone a thousand 
paces farther, turned his horse around again and took the 
road toward Kohlhaasenbriick, in order, as seemed to him 
wise and just, to hear first what the groom had to say. 
For in spite of the injuries he had suffered, a correct 
instinct, already familiar "uith the imperfect organization 
of the world, inclined him to put up with the loss of the 
horses and to regard it as a just consequence of the groom's 
misconduct in case there really could be imputed to the 
latter any such fault as the castellan charged. On the other 
hand, an equally admirable feeling took deeper and deeper 
root the farther he rode, hearing at every stop of the outrages perpetrated daily upon travelers at Tronka Castle; 
this instinct told him that if, as seemed probable, the whole 
incident proved to be a preconcerted plot, it was his duty 
to the world to make every effort to obtain for himself satisfaction for the injury suffered, and for his fellow-country-men a guarantee against similar injuries in the future. 
