
On his arrival at Kohlhaasenbriick, as soon as he had 
embraced his faithful wife Lisbeth and had kissed his children, who were shouting joyfully about his knees, he asked 
at once after Herse, the head groom, and whether anything 
had been heard from him. Lisbeth answered, " Oh yes, 
dearest Michael — that Herse! Just think! The poor 
fellow arrived here about a fortnight ago, most pitifully 
bruised and beaten; really, he was so battered that he 
couldn 't even breathe freely. We put him to bed, where he 
kept coughing up blood, and after repeated questions we 
heard a story that no one could understand. He told us that
you had left him at Tronka Castle in charge of some horses 
which they would not allow to pass through there, that by 
the most shameful maltreatment he had been forced to 
leave the castle, and that it had been impossible for him to 
bring the horses with him." 

" Eeally ! " exclaimed Kohlhaas, taking off his cloak. 
" I suppose he has recovered before this? " 

" Pretty well, except that he still coughs blood," she 
answered. " I wanted to send another groom at once to 
Tronka Castle so as to have the horses taken care of until 
you got back there ; for as Herse has always shown himself 
truthful and, indeed, more faithful to us than any other 
has ever been, I felt I had no right to doubt his statement, 
especially when confirmed by so many bruises, or to think 
that perhaps he had lost the horses in some other way. He 
implored me, however, not to require any one to go to that 
robber's nest, but to give the animals up if I didn't wish 
to sacrifice a man's life for them." 

"And is he still abed? " asked Kohlhaas, taking off his 
neckcloth. 

" He's been going about in the yard again for several 
days now," she answered. " In short, you will see for yourself, " she continued, " that it 's all quite true and that this 
incident is merely another one of those outrages that have 
been committed of late against strangers at Tronka Castle. " 

" I must first investigate that," answered Kohlhaas. 
" Call him in here, Lisbeth, if he is up and about. " With 
these words he sat down in the arm-chair and his wife, 
delighted at his calmness, went and fetched the groom. 

" What did you do at Tronka Castle, " asked Kohlhaas, 
as Lisbeth entered the room with him. " I am not very well 
pleased with jou. " 

On the groom's pale face spots of red appeared at these 
words. He was silent for a while — then he answered, 
" You are right there, Sir ; for a sulphur cord, which by 
the will of Pro\adence I was carrying in my pocket so as to 
set fire to the robber's nest from which I had been driven,
I threw into the Elbe when I heard a child crying inside the 
castle, and I thought to myself, " Let God's lightning burn 
it down; I will not! " 
