
Kohlhaas was disconcerted. " But for what cause were 
you driven from the castle? " he asked. 

To this Herse answered, " Something very wrong, Sir, " 
and wiped the perspiration from his forehead. " What is 
done, however, can't be undone. I wouldn't let the horses 
be worked to death in the fields, and so I said that they 
were still young and had never been in harness." 

Kohlhaas, trying to hide his perplexity, answered that he 
had not told the exact truth, as the horses had been in harness for a little while in the early part of the previous 
spring. "As you were a sort of guest at the castle," he 
continued, " you really might have been obliging once or 
twice whenever they happened not to have horses enough 
to get the crops in as fast as they wished." 

"I did so, Sir," said Herse. " I thought, as long as 
they looked so sulky about it, that it wouldn't hurt the 
blacks for once, and so on the third afternoon I hitched 
them in front of the others and brought in three wagonloads of grain from the fields." 

Kohlhaas, whose heart was thumping, looked down at 
the ground and said, " They told me nothing about that, 
Herse! " 

Herse assured him that it was so. "I wasn't disobliging 
save in my refusal to harness up the horses again when 
they had hardly eaten their fill at midday; then too, when 
the castellan and the steward offered to give me free fodder 
if I would do it, telling me to pocket the money that you 
had left with me to pay for feed, I answered that I would 
do something they didn't bargain for, turned around, and 
left them! " 

" But surely it was not for that disobliging act that you 
were driven away from the castle," said Kohlhaas. 

" Mercy, no ! " cried the groom. " It was because of a 
very wicked crime! For the horses of two knights who
came to the castle were put into the stable for the night 
and mine were tied to the stable door. And when I took 
the blacks from the castellan, who was putting the knights' 
horses into my stable, and asked where my animals were 
to go, he showed me a pigsty built of laths and boards 
against the castle wall." 

" You mean," interrupted Kohlhaas, " that it was such 
a poor shelter for horses that it was more like a pigsty than 
a stable? " 

" It was a pigsty. Sir, " answered Herse ; " really and 
truly a pigsty, with the pigs running in and out ; I couldn 't 
stand upright in it." 

" Perhaps there was no other shelter to be found for 
the blacks," Kohlhaas rejoined; " and of course, in a way, 
the knights' horses had the right to better quarters." 
