
" There wasn't much room," answered the groom, dropping his voice. " Counting these two, there were, in all, 
seven knights lodging at the castle. If it had been you, you 
would have had the horses moved closer together. I said 
I would try to rent a stable in the village, but the castellan 
objected that he had to keep the horses under his own eyes 
and told me not to dare to take them away from the 
courtyard. " 

" Hum ! " said Kohlhaas. " What did you say to that 1 " 
"As the steward said the two guests were only going to 

spend the night and continue on their way the next morning, I led the two horses into the pigsty. But the following 
day passed and they did not go, and on the third it was 
said the gentlemen were going to stay some weeks longer 
at the castle." 

" After all, it was not so bad, Herse, in the pigsty, as it 
seemed to you when you first stuck your nose into it, " said 
Kohlhaas. 

" That's true," answered the groom. "After I had 
swept the place out a little, it wasn't so bad! I gave a 
groschen to the maid to have her put the pigs somewhere 
else ; and by taking the boards from the roof -bars at dawn
and laying them on again at night, I managed to arrange 
it so that the horses could stand upright in the daytime. 
So there they stood like geese in a coop, and stuck their 
heads through the roof, looking around for Kohlhaasenbriick or some other place where they would be better off. " 

" Well then, " said Kohlhaas, " why in the world did they 
drive you away? " 

" Sir, I'll tell you," answered the groom, " it was because 
they wanted to get rid of me, since, as long as I was there, 
they could not work the horses to death. Everywhere, in 
the yard, in the servants' hall, they made faces at me, and 
because I thought to myself, ' You can draw your jaws 
down until you dislocate them, for all I care,' they picked 
a quarrel and threw me out of the courtyard." 

"But what provoked them!" cried Kohlhaas; "they 
must have had some sort of provocation ! " 

" Oh, to be sure, " answered Herse ; " the best imaginable ! On the evening of the second day spent in the pigsty, 
I took the horses, which had become dirty in spite of my 
efforts, and started to ride them down to the horse-pond. 
When I reached the castle-gate and was just about to turn, 
I heard the castellan and the steward, with servants, dogs 
and cudgels, rushing out of the servants' hall after me and 
calling, ' Stop thief ! Stop gallows-bird ! ' as if they were 
possessed. The gate-keeper stepped in front of me, and 
when I asked him and the raving crowd that was running 
at me, ' What in the world is the matter? ' — ' What's the 
matter ! ' answered the castellan, seizing my two black 
horses by the bridle. * Where are you going with the 
horses? ' he asked, and seized me by the chest.
