
 ' Where am I going? ' I repeated. ' Thunder and lightning! I am 
riding down to the horse-pond. Do you think that I — ? ' — 
* To the horse-pond! ' cried the castellan. ' I'll teach you, 
you swindler, to swim along the highroad back to Kohlhaasenbriick! ' And with a spiteful, vicious jerk he and 
the steward, who had caught me by the leg, hurled me down 
from the horse so that I measured my full length in the mud.
' Murder ! Help ! ' I cried ; * breast straps and blankets and 
a bundle of linen belonging to me are in the stable. ' But 
while the steward led the horses away, the castellan and 
servants fell upon me with their feet and whips and cudgels, 
so that I sank dowTi behind the castle-gate half dead. And 
when I cried, ' The thieves ! Where are they taking my 
horses? ' and got to my feet — ' Out of the courtyard with 
you ! ' screamed the castellan, ' Sick him, Caesar ! Sick 
him, Hunter ! ' and, ' Sick him. Spitz ! ' he called, and a 
pack of more than twelve dogs rushed at me. Then I tore 
something from the fence, possibly a picket, and stretched 
out three dogs dead beside me! But when I had to give 
way because I was suffering from fearful wounds and bites, 
I heard a shrill whistle; the dogs scurried into the yard, 
the gates were swung shut and the bolt shot into position, 
and I sank down on the highroad unconscious. " 

Kohlhaas, white in the face, said with forced jocularity, 
" Didn't you really want to escape, Herse? " And as the 
latter, with a deep blush, looked down at the ground — 
" Confess to me ! " said he ; " You didn't like it in the pigsty; you thought to yourself, you would rather be in the 
stable at Kohlhaasenbriick, after all! " 

" Od 's thunder ! " cried Herse ; " breast strap and 
blankets I tell you, and a bundle of linen I left behind in 
the pigsty. Wouldn 't I have taken along three gold gulden 
that I had wrapped in a red silk neckcloth and hidden away 
behind the manger? Blazes, hell, and the devil! When 
you talk like that, I'd like to relight at once the sulphur 
cord I threw away! " 

" There, there! " said the horse-dealer, " I really meant 
no harm. What you have said — see here, I believe it word 
for word, and when the matter comes up, I am ready to 
take the Holy Communion myself as to its truth. I am 
sorry that you have not fared better in my service. Go, 
Herse, go back to bed. Have them bring you a bottle of 
wine and make yourself comfortable ; you shall have justice 
done you ! " With that he stood up, made out a list of the 
things which the head groom had left behind in the pigsty, 
jotted down the value of each, asked him how high he 
estimated the cost of his medical treatment, and sent him 
from the room after shaking hands with him once more. 

Thereupon he recounted to Lisbeth, his wife, the whole 
course of the affair, explained the true relation of events, 
and declared to her that he Avas determined to demand public justice for himself. He had the satisfaction of finding 
that she heartily approved his purpose, for, she said, many 
other travelers, perhaps less patient than he, would pass 
by the castle, and it was doing God's work to put a stop 
to disorders such as these She added that she would 
manage to get together the money to pay the expenses of 
the lawsuit. Kohlhaas called her his brave vdie, spent 
that day and the next very happily with her and the children, and, as soon as his business would at all permit it, 
set out for Dresden in order to lay his suit before the court. 
