
Here, with the help of a lawyer whom he knew, he drew 
up a complaint, in which, after giving a detailed account 
of the outrage which Squire Wenzel Tronka had committed 
against him and against his groom Herse, he petitioned for 
the lawful punishment of the former, restoration of the 
horses to their original condition, and compensation for the 
damages which he and his groom had sustained. His case 
was indeed perfectly clear. The fact that the horses had 
been detained contrary to law threw a decisive light on 
everything else; and even had one been willing to assume 
that they had sickened by sheer accident, the demand of 
the horse-dealer to have them returned to him in sound condition would still have been just. While looking about him 
in the capital, Kohlhaas had no lack of friends, either, who 
promised to give his case lively support. His extensive 
trade in horses had secured him the acquaintance of the 
most important men of the country, and the honesty 
with which he conducted his business had won him their 
good will.
Kohlhaas dined cheerfully several times with his lawyer, 
who was himself a man of consequence, left a sum of money 
with him to defray the costs of the lawsuit and, fully reassured by the latter as to the outcome of the case, returned, 
after the lapse of some weeks, to his wife Lisbeth in Kohlhaasenbriick. 

Nevertheless months passed, and the year was nearing 
its close before he received even a statement from Saxony 
concerning the suit which he had instituted there, let alone 
the final decree itself. After he had applied several times 
more to the court, he sent a confidential letter to his lawyer 
asking what was the cause of such undue delay. He was told 
in reply that the suit had been dismissed in the Dresden 
courts at the instance of an influential person. To the astonished reply of the horse-dealer asking what was the reason 
of this, the lawyer informed him that Squire Wenzel Tronka 
was related to two young noblemen, Hinz and Kunz Tronka, 
one of whom was Cup-bearer to the person of the sovereign, 
and the other actually Chamberlain. He also advised Kohlhaas not to make any further appeal to the court of law, 
but to try to regain possession of his horses which were 
still at Tronka Castle, giving him to understand that the 
Squire, who was then stopping in the capital, seemed to 
have ordered his people to deliver them to him. He closed 
with a request to excuse him from executing any further 
commissions in the matter, in case Kohlhaas refused to be 
content with this. 

At this time Kohlhaas happened to be in Brandenburg, 
where the City Governor, Heinrich von Geusau, to whose 
jurisdiction Kohlhaasenbriick belonged, was busy establishing several charitable institutions for the sick and the 
poor out of a considerable fund which had fallen to the city. 
He was especially interested in fitting up, for the benefit 
of invalids, a mineral spring which rose in one of the villages in the vicinity, and which was thought to have greater 
powers than it subsequently proved to possess. As Kohlhaas had had numerous dealings with him at the time of
his sojourn at Court and was therefore known to him, he 
allowed Herse, the head groom, who, ever since that unlucky day in Tronka Castle, had suffered pains in the chest 
when he breathed, to try the effect of the little healing 
spring, which had been inclosed and roofed over. 

It so happened that the City Governor was just giving 
some directions, as he stood beside the depression in which 
Kohlhaas had placed Herse, when a messenger, whom the 
horse-dealer's wife had sent on after him, put in his hands 
the disheartening letter from his lawyer in Dresden. The 
City Governor, who, while speaking with the doctor, noticed 
that Kohlhaas let a tear fall on the letter he had just read, 
approached him and, in a friendly, cordial way, asked 
him what misfortune had befallen him. The horse-dealer 
handed him the letter without answering. The worthy 
Governor, knowing the abominable injustice done him at 
Tronka Castle as a result of which Herse was lying there 
before him sick, perhaps never to recover, clapped Kohlhaas on the shoulder and told him not to lose courage, for 
he would help him secure justice. In the evening, when 
the horse-dealer, acting upon his orders, came to the palace 
to see him, Kohlhaas was told that what he should do was 
to draw up a petition to the Elector of Brandenburg, Avith 
a short account of the incident, to inclose the lawyer's letter, and, on account of the violence which had been committed against him on Saxon territory, solicit the protection of the sovereign. He promised him to see that the 
petition would be delivered into the hands of the Elector 
together with another packet that was all ready to be dispatched ; if circumstances permitted, the latter would, without fail, approach the Elector of Saxony on his behalf. 
Such a step would be quite sufficient to secure Kohlhaas 
justice at the hand of the tribunal at Dresden, in spite of 
the arts of the Squire and his partisans. 