Kohlhaas, much delighted, thanked the Governor very heartily for this new 
proof of his good will, and said he was only sorry that he 
had not instituted proceedings at once in Berlin without
taking any steps in the matter at Dresden. After he had 
made out the complaint in due form at the office of the 
municipal court and delivered it to the Governor, he returned to Kohlhaasenbriick, more encouraged than ever 
about the outcome of his affair. 

After only a few weeks, however, he was grieved to learn 
from a magistrate who had gone to Potsdam on business 
for the City Governor, that the Elector had handed the 
petition over to his Chancellor, Count Kallheim, and that 
the latter, instead of taking the course most likely to produce results and petitioning the Court at Dresden directly 
for investigation and punishment of the outrage, had, as 
a preliminary, applied to the Squire Tronka for further 
information. 

The magistrate, who had stopped in his carriage outside 
of Kohlhaas' house and seemetl to have been instructed to 
deliver this message to the horse-dealer, could give the latter no satisfactory answer to his perplexed question as to 
why this step had been taken. He was apparently in a 
hurry to continue his journey, and merely added that the 
Governor sent Kohlhaas word to be patient. Not until the 
very end of the short interview did the horse-dealer divine 
from some casual words he let fall, that Count Kallheim 
was related by marriage to the house of Tronka. 

Kohlhaas, who no longer took any pleasure either in his 
horse-breeding, or his house or Ms farm, scarcely even in 
his wife and children, waited all the next month, full of 
gloomy forebodings as to the future. And, just as he had 
expected at the expiration of this time, Herse, somewhat 
benefited by the baths, came back from Brandenburg bringing a rather lengthy decree and a letter from the City Goyr_ 
ernofr- The latter ran as follows : He was sorry that he 
could do nothing in Kohlhaas' behalf; he was sending him 
a decision from the Chancery of State and he advised him 
to fetch away the horses that he had left behind at the 
Tronka Castle, and then to let the matter drop. 

The decree read as follows: "According to the report
of the tribunal at Dresden, he was a good-for-nothing, quarrelsome person; the Squire with whom he had left the 
horses was not keeping them from him in any way; let him 
send to the castle and take them away, or at least inform 
the Squire where to send them to him ; in any case he should 
not trouble the Chancery of the State with such petty quarrels and mischief -making. " 

Kohlhaas, who was not concerned about the horses themselves — he would have felt just as much pain if it had been 
a question of a couple of dogs — Kohlhaas foamed with 
rage when he received this letter. As often as he heard 
a noise in the courtyard he looked toward the gateway with 
the most revolting feelings of anticipation that had ever 
agitated his breast, to see whether the servants of the 
Squire had come to restore to him, perhaps even with an 
apology the starved and worn-out horses. This was the 
only situation Avhich he felt that his soul, well disciplined 
though it had been by the world, was not prepared to meet. 
