
A short time after, however, he heard from an acquaintance who had traveled that road, that at Tronka Castle 
his horses were still being used for work in the fields exactly 
like the Squire's other horses. Through the midst of the 
pain caused by beholding the world in a state of such 
monstrous disorder, shot the inward satisfaction of knowing that from henceforth he would be at peace with himself. 

He invited a bailiff, who was his neighbor, to come to see 
him. The latter had long cherished the idea of enlarging 
his estate by purchasing the property which adjoined it. 
When he had seated himself Kohlhaas asked him how much 
he would give for his possessions on Brandenburg and 
Saxon territory, for house and farm, in a lump, immovable 
or not. 

Lisbeth, his wife, grew pale when she heard his words. 
She turned around and picked up her youngest child who 
was plajdng on the floor behind her. While the child pulled 
at her kerchief, she darted glances of mortal terror past 
the little one's red cheeks, at the horse-dealer, and at a 
paper which he held in his hand.
The bailiff stared at his neighbor in astonishment and 
asked him what had suddenly given him such strange ideas ; 
to which the horse-dealer, with as much gaiety as he could 
muster, replied that the idea of selling his farm on the 
banks of the Havel was not an entirely new one, but that 
they had often before discussed the subject together. As 
for his house in the outskirts of Dresden — in comparison 
with the farm it was only a tag end and need not be taken 
into consideration. In short, if the bailiff would do as he 
wished and take over both pieces of property, he was ready 
to close the contract with him. He added with rather 
forced pleasantry that Kohlhaasenbriick was not the world ; 
that there might be objects in life compared with which that 
of taking care of his home and family as a father is supposed to would be a secondary and unworthy one. In a 
word, he must tell him that his soul was intent upon accomplishing great things, of which, perhaps, he would hear 
shortly. The bailiff, reassured by these words, said jokingly to Kohlhaas' wife, Avho was kissing her child repeatedly, " Surely he will not insist upon being paid immediately! " Then he laid his hat and cane, which he had 
been holding between his knees, on the table, and taking the 
paper, which the horse-dealer was holding in his hand, 
began to read. Kohlhaas, moving closer to him, explained 
that it was a contingent contract to purchase, drawn up by 
himself, his right to cancel the contract expiring in four 
weeks. He showed the bailiff that nothing was wanting but 
the signatures, the insertion of the purchase-price itself, and 
the amount of the forfeit that he, Kohlhaas, would agree to 
pay in case he should withdraw from the contract within the 
four weeks ' time. Again Kohlhaas gaily urged his friend 
to make an offer, assuring him that he would be reasonable 
and would make the conditions easy for him. His wife was 
walking up and down the room ; she breathed so hard that 
the kerchief, at which the boy had been pulling, threatened 
to fall clear off her shoulder. 