The bailiff said that he really 
had no way of judging the value of the property in Dres-
den ; whereupon Kolilhaas, shoving toward him some letters 
which had been exchanged at the time of its purchase, 
answered that he estimated it at one hundred gold gulden, 
although the letters would show that it had cost him almost 
half as much again. The bailiff who, on reading the deed 
of sale, found that, strangely enough, he too was guaranteed 
the privilege of withdrawing from the bargain, had already 
half made up his mind ; but he said that, of course, he could 
make no use of the stud-horses which were in the stables. 
When Kolilhaas replied that he wasn't at all inclined to 
part with the horses either, and that he also desired to keep 
for himself some weapons which were hanging in the 
armory, the bailiff still continued to hesitate for some time 
At last he repeated an offer that, once before, when they 
were out walking together, he had made him, half in jest 
and half in earnest — a trifling offer indeed, in comparison 
with the value of the property. Kolilhaas pushed the pen 
and ink over for him to sign, and while the bailiff, who could 
not believe his senses, again inquired if he were really in 
earnest, and the horse-dealer asked, a little sensitively, 
whether he thought that he was only jesting with him, then 
took up the pen, tliough with a very serious face, and wrote. 
However, he crossed out the clause concerning the sum to 
be forfeited in case the seller should repent of the transaction, bound himself to a loan of one hundred gold gulden 
on a mortgage on the Dresden property, which he absolutely refused to buy outright, and allowed Kohlhaas full 
liberty to withdraw from the transaction at any time within 
two months. 

The horse-dealer, touched by this conduct, shook his hand 
with great cordiality, and after they had furthermore 
agreed on the principal conditions, to the effect that a 
fourth part of the purchase-price should without fail be 
paid immediately in cash, and the balance paid into the 
Hamburg bank in three months' time, Kohlhaas called for 
wine in order to celebrate such a happy conclusion of the 
bargain. He told the maid-servant who entered wdth the
bottles, to order Sternbald, the groom, to saddle the chestnut horse for him, as he had to ride to the capital, where 
he had some business to attend to. He gave them to understand that, in a short time, when he returned, he would talk 
more frankly concerning what he must for the present continue to keep to himself. As he poured out the wine into 
the glasses, he asked about the Poles and the Turks who 
were just then at war, and involved the bailiff in many
political conjectures on the subject; then, after finally 
drinking once more to the success of their business, he 
allowed the latter to depart. 

When the bailiff had left the room, Lisbeth fell down on 
her knees before her husband. " If you have any affection 
for me," she cried, " and for the children whom I have 
borne you ; if you have not already, for what reason I know 
not, cast us out from your heart, then tell me what these 
horrible preparations mean! " 

Kohlhaas answered, " Dearest wife, they mean nothing 
which need cause you any alarm, as matters stand at present. I have received a decree in which I am told that my 
complaint against the Squire Wenzel Tronka is a piece of 
impertinent mischief-making. As there must exist some 
misunderstanding in this matter, I have made up my mind 
to present my complaint once more, this time in person, to 
the sovereign himself." 

" But why mil you sell your house? " she cried, rising 
with a look of despair. 

The horse-dealer, clasping her tenderly to his breast, 
answered, " Because, dear Lisbeth, I do not care to remain 
in a country where they will not protect me in my rights. 
If I am to be kicked I would rather be a dog than a man ! 
I am sure that my wife thinks about this just as I do." 

" How do you know," she asked wildly, " that they will 
not protect you in your rights? If, as is becoming, you 
approach the Elector humbly with your petition, how do 
you know that it will be thrown aside or answered by a 
refusal to listen to you? "