When the court, in compliance with the opinion and accusation of the people, which could not be ignored, ordered 
Bastide's arrest, he already knew the forces at work against 
him. He was sitting under a huge plane-tree, occupied 
with some wood-carving, when the constables appeared in 
the yard. Charlotte Arlabosse rushed up to him and 
seized his arm, but he shook her off, saying : " Let them 
have their way, the abscess has been ripe a long time.' : 
Stepping forward to meet the gendarmes with satirical 
pomposity, he cried: "Your servant, gentlemen." 

The occupants of La Morne were subjected to a rigorous 
examination. According to Bastide's own statement, he 
had ridden to Rodez on the afternoon of the nineteenth of 
March; at seven in the evening he was already with his 
sister in the village of Gros ; there he remained over night, 
returned in the morning to La Morne, then upon the news 
of his uncle's death, he had ridden to Rodez once more and 
spent about half an hour in Fualdes' house. His sister 
confirmed his statement that he had passed the night in her 
house, and added that he had been particularly cheerful
and amiable. The maid, too, who had waited on him and 
prepared his bed, declared that he had retired at ten o'clock. 
As to the domestics at La Morne, they babbled of one thing 
and another. In order to say something and not stand 
there like simpletons or accomplices, they involved themselves in speeches of significant obscurity; thus one of the 
servants remarked that if the master's gray mare could 
but speak he could tell of some hard riding that night. The 
maids spoke incoherently or shed tears; Charlotte Arlabosse even fled, but was captured in the vineyards and 
incarcerated in the town prison. 

These occurrences were by no means concealed from 
Bousquier and his associates; nay, insignificant details 
were emphatically dwelt upon, in order to give them a 
sense of security and assist their memory. It was the 
smuggler Bach, in particular — who, with the Bancal couple, 
could not at first be induced to make a statement — that the 
police magistrate had in view. He had terrified judges 
and keepers by his violent paroxysms of rage, and, to 
punish and subdue him, had been put in chains. Unconscious of it himself, this man suffered from a fierce longing 
for freedom, for he was the model of a roving vagabond 
and tramp. One night when he had attempted to strangle 
himself, Monsieur Jausion acquainted him with the confession of his comrade, Bousquier, and admonished him too 
to abandon his fruitless stubbornness. Thereupon the 
demeanor of the man changed at once ; he became cheerful 
and communicative, and, grinning maliciously, said: "All 
right, if Bousquier knows much, I know still more." And 
in fact, he did know more. He was a stammerer and took 
advantage of this defect to gain time for reflection when 
his imagination halted, and every time he strayed into the 
regions of the fabulous the keen-witted Monsieur Jausion 
led him gently back to the path of reality. 
