
This was his story: When he entered the room with 
Bousquier, lawyer Fualdes was seated at the table, and was 
made to sign papers. The tall, powerful man, Bastide
Grammont, of coarse — no doubt it was Grammont; Bach 
in this relied upon the information of the magistrate and 
upon glib Rumor — stuck the signed papers in his pocket-book. In the meanwhile Madame Bancal cooked a supper, 
chicken with vegetables, and veal with rice; an important 
detail, indicating the cold-bloodedness of the murderers. 
•Shortly before eight o'clock two drummers came in, but the 
face of the host or of the strange gentleman displeased 
them ; they thought they were in the way and left, whereupon the gate was locked. But there was a knocking several times after that; the preconcerted signal was three 
rapid knocks with the fist, and one after the other there 
entered the soldier Colard with his sweetheart, the humpbacked Missonier, an aristocratic looking veiled lady with 
green feathers in her hat, and a tobacco-dealer in a blue 
coat. The hat with the green feathers was a special proof 
of Bach's powers of invention, and stood out with picturesque verisimilitude against the blue-coated tobacconist. 

At half past eight Madame Bancal went up to the attic 
to put her daughter Madeleine to bed, and now Bastide 
Grammont explained to the old man that he must die. The 
imploring supplications of the victim resulted only in the 
powerful Bastide seizing him, and, in spite of his violent 
resistance, laying him on the table, from which Bancal 
hastily removed two loaves of bread which some one had 
brought along. Fualdes begged pitifully that he might be 
given time to reconcile himself with God, but Bastide Grammont replied gruffly : " Reconcile yourself with the devil. ' 

Here M. Jausion interrupted the relation, and inquired 
whether a hand-organ had not perchance at that moment 
commenced to play in front of the house. Bach eagerly 
confirmed the supposition, and continued his report, which 
now wrought up the narrator himself to a pitch of excitement and horror: Colard and Bancal held the old man's 
legs, while the tobacconist and his sweetheart seized his 
head and arms. A gentleman with a wooden leg and a 
three-cornered hat held a candle high in the air. There 
was something weird about the emergence of this new 
figure; if it stood for nothing more than a finishing touch 
to the horror of that night of murder, it fulfilled its aim to 
perfection. The wooden-legged man uplifting the candle 
was like an impious spirit from the nether world, and it 
was not necessary to dwell upon the narrow chin, the sneering mouth, the spectral eye. 

With a broad knife Bastide Grammont gave the old man 
a stab; Fualdes, by a superhuman effort, succeeded in 
breaking loose; he sprang up and ran, already mortally 
wounded, through the room ; Bastide Grammont, pursuing, 
seized hold of him, threw him again on the table, the table 
rocked, one leg broke ; now the dying man was placed upon 
two benches rapidly moved close to each other, and Bastide 
Grammont thrust the knife into his throat. With the last 
groan of the old man, Bancal came and his wife caught up 
the flowing blood in an earthen pot; the part that ran on 
the floor was scrubbed up by the women. In the pockets 
of the murdered man a five franc piece and several sous 
were found. Bastide Grammont threw the money into the 
apron of the Bancal woman, saying: " Take it! We are 
not killing him for his money." A key, too, was found; 
that Bastide kept. Madame Bancal had a hankering for 
the fine shirt of the dead man, and remarked covetously 
that it looked like a chorister's shirt; she was diverted 
from her desire, however, on being presented with an 
amethyst ring on Fualdes' finger. This ring was taken 
away the following day by a stranger for a consideration 
of ten francs. 
