
When Bach's recital with all its circumstantiality and its 
simulated completeness of strange and illuminating details 
became known, there lacked but little to hailing the imaginative scamp as a deliverer. Indignation fed belief, and 
criticism seemed treason. The public, the witnesses, the 
judges, the authorities, all believed in the deed and all 
began to join in invention. Bach and Bousquier, who were 
confronted with each other, quarreled and called each other
liars; one claimed that he had gone into the Bancal house 
before, the other after, the murder; one declared that he 
had assisted in the deed, the other that he had only lifted 
the body, which was wrapped in a sheet and bound with 
ropes. The half-witted Missonnier designated still another 
batch of persons whom he had seen in the Bancal house, 
two notaries from Alby and a cook. In Rose Feral 's 
tavern, where all sorts of shady characters congregated, 
and old warlike exploits and thieveries were the subjects 
of discussion, on the night of the murder the talk fell upon 
the pillaging of a house, the property of a Liberal. This 
report was designed to heighten the apprehension of the 
quiet citizens, and that afterward all the conspirators, even 
well-to-do people, met in Bancal 's house gave no cause for 
astonishment. Everything harmonized in the intricate, 
devilish plot ; in the clothes of the dead Fualdes no money, 
on his fingers no ring, had been found ; Grammont had the 
bailiff in his house as late as the seventeenth of March, and 
this circumstance, singled out at an opportune moment 
from the quagmire of lies, inspired security. Bastide was 
hopelessly entangled. The prisoners were thrown into a 
panic by the palpable agitation of the people; each one 
appeared guilty in the other's eyes, each one was ready to 
admit anything that was desired concerning the other, in 
order to exonerate himself; they were ignorant of their 
fate, they lost all sense of the meaning of words, they were 
no longer conscious of themselves, their bodies, their souls ; 
they felt themselves encompassed by invisible clasps, and 
each sought to free himself on his own account, without 
knowing what he had actually done or failed to do. Every 
day new arrests were made, no traveler passing through 
was sure of his freedom, and after a few weeks half of 
France was seized with the intoxication of rage, a craving 
for revenge, and fear. Of the figures of the ludicrously gruesome murder imbroglio, now this, now that one emerged 
with greater distinctness and reality, and the one that stood 
out finally as the most important, because her name was
constantly brought forward, was the veiled lady with the 
green feather in her hat; nay, she gradually became the 
centre and impelling power of the bloody deed, perhaps 
only because her origin and existence remained a mystery. 
Many raised their voices in suspicion against Charlotte 
Arlabosse, but she was able to establish her innocence by 
well-nigh unassailable testimony ; besides, she appeared too 
harmless and too much like a victim of Bastide's tyrannical 
cruelty, to answer to the demoniacal picture of the mysterious unknown. 
