While Bach and Bousquier, in a rivalry which hastened 
their own ruin, tempted the authorities to clemency by ever 
new inventions, and, encouraged by the gossip which filtered 
through to them by subterranean channels, disturbed further the already troubled waters ; while the soldier Colard 
and the Bancal couple, owing to the rigorous confinement, 
the harsh treatment of the keepers, and the excruciating 
hearings, were thrown into paroxysms of insanity, so that 
they reported things which even Jausion, used as he was 
to extravagance, had to characterize as the mere phantoms 
of a dream; while the other prisoners, steering unsteadily 
between their actual experiences and morbid visions, constantly suspected each other, and retracted today what they 
had sworn to yesterday, now whined for mercy, now maintained a defiant silence; while the inhabitants of the city, 
the villages, the whole province, demanded the termination 
of the long-winded procedure and the punishment of the 
evil-doers, with a fanaticism whose fire was tended and fed 
by mysterious agents; while, finally, the court, in the uncontrollably increasing flood of accusations and calumnies, lost 
its sense of direction, and was gradually becoming a tool 
in the hands of the populace; — in the meanwhile the 
boundless forces at work succeeded in poisoning the mind 
of a child, who appeared as a witness against father and 
mother, and Led the deluded people to believe that God himself had by a miracle loosened the tongue of an infant. 
At the outsel the eleven-year-old Madeleine Bancal had
been questioned by the police magistrate ; she knew nothing. 
Subsequently the child came to the tavern, and at once 
people came forward who had heard from others, who 
again had heard from third or fourth parties, that the girl 
had seen the old man laid upon the table and her mother 
receiving money. Of course it was ascertained by Counselor 
Pinaud, the only man who retained clarity and judgment in the wild confusion, that Madeleine had taken presents from the managers of the tavern, as well as from other 
people; but it was too late by that time to discover and 
extirpate the root of the lie. She was persuaded ever more 
firmly into a belief of her first statement, and the recital 
kept expanding the greater the attention paid her, the more 
her vanity was flattered, until she believed she had really 
witnessed all that she related, and she experienced a feeling of satisfaction in the sympathy and pity of the grown 
people. Her mother had taken her to the attic, so she 
reported, but fearing the cold, she had stealthily crept 
downstairs and hidden herself in the bed in the alcove. 
Through a hole in the curtain she could see and hear everything. When the old man was about to be stabbed, the 
lady with the green feather ran terrified into the room 
and attempted to escape through the window. Bastide 
Grammont dragged her forth and wanted to kill her. Bancal and Colard begged him to spare her, and she had to 
swear an awful oath which pledged her to silence. A little 
later, Grammont, whose suspicions were not silenced, examined the bed also. Madeleine pretended to be asleep. 
He felt her twice, and then said to the mother that she must 
attend to getting rid of the child, which Madame Bancal 
promised to do for a sum of four hundred francs. The next 
morning the mother sent the child to the field, where the 
father had just dug a deep hole. She thought her father 
meant to throw her in, but he embraced her, weeping, and 
admonished her to be good. 
