
Even if people had been ready to doubt every other testimony, the report of the child passed as irrefutable, and
no one concerned himself as to how it had been concocted, 
how the ignorant young thing had been courted, bribed, 
how she had been intoxicated by fondling, applause, or, it 
may be, even by fear. She was dragged from her sleep 
at night, in order to take advantage of her bewilderment; 
every new fancy was welcomed, the girl thought she was 
doing something remarkable, and played her part with 
increasing readiness. In such wise she molded out of 
nothing things which were calculated to throw a singularly 
realistic light upon the fevered image of the fateful night; 
for instance, how the mother had cut bread with the same 
knife with which the old gentleman had been stabbed, and 
how Madeleine had refused the bread, because it made her 
shudder ; or how the blood, caught up in the pan, had been 
given to one of the pigs to drink, and how the animal had 
become wild in consequence, and had rushed, screaming 
madly, through the yard. 

Bastide Grammont bore hearing after hearing with a cold 
placidity. His frigidly haughty dignity, his mocking smile, 
the mute shrug of his shoulders, caused Monsieur Jausion 
frequent annoyance. But there were times when, carried 
away by impatience, he interrupted the judge outright, and 
attacked, boldly and eloquently, the frail yet indestructible 
structure of the evidence. 

"If it was my intention and interest to do away with 
my uncle, did it require a conspiracy of so many people? " 
he asked, his face blazing with scorn. "Am I supposed 
to have such a combination of craft and stupidity as 
to ally myself with brothel-keepers, harlots, smugglers, 
old women, and convicted criminals, people who would, 
as long as I live, remain my masters and blackmailers, 
even supposing silence to be among their virtues? Can 
anything more senseless be imagined than to seize a 
man on an open road and drag him into a house known 
to })e suspicions? Why all this elaborate plot? Did 
no better occasion offer itself to me? Could I not have 
enticed the old man to the estate, shot him and buried him 
in the woods? It is claimed that I forced him to sign
bills, — where are they, these bills! They would be bound 
to turn up and expose me. You say yourself that the Bancal house is dilapidated, that one can look into Bancal's 
room from the Spaniards' dwelling through the rotten 
boards ; why, then, did Monsieur Saavedra hear nothing .' 
Aha, he slept! A sound sleep, that. Or is he likewise, in 
the conspiracy, like my mother, my sister, my sweetheart, 
my faithful servants! And admitting all, were not the 
Bancal couple sufficient to help kill a feeble old man and 
dispose of his body; did I have to fetch half a dozen suspicious fellows, besides, from the taverns? Why did not 
my uncle cry out? He was gagged ; well and good ; but the 
gag was found in the yard. Then he did scream, after all, 
when the gag was removed, and I had the organ-grinders 
play. But such organs are noisy and draw people to the 
windows and into the street. And why butcher the victim, 
since so many strong men could easily have strangled him? 
Show me the medical report, Monsieur, does it not speak 
of a gash rather than a stab? 
