
And what twaddle, that 
about the funeral train, what betraying arrangements in a 
country where every sign-post has eyes ! I am accused of 
having rushed into my uncle's house the following day and 
stolen some papers. Where are those papers? My uncle 
died almost poor. His claim against me was transferred 
to President Seguret. Why, then, the deed? What do they 
want with me ? Who that has eyes sees my hands stained ?  
This language was defiant. It aroused the displeasure 
of the court and increased the hatred of the multitude, 
whom it reached in garbled shape. Through fear of the 
people, no lawyer dared undertake Bastide Grammont's 
defense. Monsieur Pinaud, who alone had the courage to 
point out the improbabilities and the fantastic origin of 
most of the testimony, came near paying with his life for 
his zeal for truth. One night a mob, including some peasants, marched to his house, smashed his windows, demolished the gate, and set fire to the steps. The terrified 
man made his escape with difficulty, and fled to Toulouse.
Bastide Grammont clearly recognized that, for the present, it was useless to offer any resistance; he determined, 
therefore, to transform all his valor into patience and keep 
his lips closed as if they were doors through which his 
hopes might take flight. He, the freest of men, had to pass 
the radiant spring days, the fragrant summer nights, in a 
damp hole which rendered one's own breath offensive; he, 
to whom animals spoke, for whom flowers had eyes, the 
the earth at times a semblance of the glow of love, who 
walked, strode, roamed, rode, as artists produce enchanting 
creations — he was condemned by the perverse play of incomprehensible circumstances to a foretaste of the grave 
and deprived of what he held dearest and most precious. 
Frequent grew the nights of sullenness when his eyes, brimming over with tears, were dulled at the thought of disgrace; more frequent the days of irrepressible longing, 
when every grain of sand that crumbled from the moist 
walls was a reminder of the wondrous being and working 
of the earth, the meadow, the wood. From the events which 
had overshadowed his life he turned away his thoughts in 
disgust, and he scarcely heard the keeper when he appeared 
one morning and exultingly informed him that the mysterious unknown, who was destined to become the chief 
witness, the lady with the green feathers, had finally been 
found; she had come forward of her own accord, and she 
was the daughter of President Seguret, Clarissa Mirabel. 

Bastide Grammont gazed gloomily before him. But from 
that hour that name hovered about his ears like the fluttering of the wings of inevitable Fate. 

This is what took place : Madame Mirabel confessed that 
on the night of the murder she had been in the Bancal house. 
This confession, however, was made under a peculiar 
stress, and in less time than it took swift Rumor to make 
it public, she retracted everything. But the word had 
fallen and bred deed upon deed. 
