
Clarissa Mirabel was the only child of President Seguret.
She was brought up in the country, in the old Chateau 
Perrie, which her father had bought at the outbreak of the 
Revolution. Owing to the political upheavals, and the uncertain condition of things, she did not enjoy the benefit 
of any regular instruction in her childhood. The profound 
isolation in which she grew up favored her inclination to 
romanticism. She idolized her parents; in the agitated 
period of anarchy, the girl, scarcely fourteen years old, 
exhibited at her father's side such a spirit of self-sacrifice 
and such devotion that she aroused the attention of Colonel 
Mirabel, who, five years later, came and sued for her hand. 
She did not love him, — she had shortly before entered into 
a singularly romantic relationship with a shepherd, — yet 
she married him, because her father bade her. The union 
was not happy ; after three months she separated from her 
husband ; the Colonel went with the army to Spain. At the 
conclusion of the war he returned, and Clarissa received 
an intimation of his desire that she should live with him; 
she refused, however, and declared her refusal, moreover, 
in writing, incensed that he should have sent strangers to 
negotiate with her. But she learned that he was wounded, 
and this caused a revulsion of feeling. In the night, by 
secret passages, with ceremonious formalities, the Colonel 
was carried into the chateau, and Clarissa tended him, in 
a remote chamber, with faithful care. As long as it remained secret, the new sort of relationship to the man as 
a lover fascinated her, but her mother discovered everything and believed that nothing stood in the way of a complete reconciliation between the pair. Clarissa succeeded 
in removing him; in a thicket near the village she had 
nightly rendezvous with him. Colonel Mirabel, however, 
grew weary of these singular doings ; he obtained a position 
in Lyons, but died soon after from the consequences of his 
excesses. 

Years passed; her mother, too, died, and Clarissa's grief 
was so overwhelming that she would spend entire days at 
the grave, and the influence of her more readily consoled
father alone succeeded in inducing- her to reconcile herself 
to her lonely, empty existence. Left completely to herself, 
she indulged in the pleasure of indiscriminate reading, and 
her wishes turned, with hidden passion, toward great experiences. Her peculiar tastes and habits made her a subject 
of gossip in the little town ; she had children and half -grown 
boys and girls come to the chateau, and recited poems to 
them and trained them for acting. Her frank nature created 
enemies; she said what she thought, offended with no ill 
intention, caused confusion and gossip in all innocence, 
exaggerated petty things and overlooked great ones, took 
pleasure at times in masking, appearing in disguise, and 
impersonating imaginary characters, and captivated the 
susceptible by the charm of her speech, the bright versatility 
of her spirit, the winning heartiness of her manner. 
