
She was now thirty-five years old ; but not only because 
she was so exceedingly slender, small, and dainty, did she 
seem like a girl of eighteen — her nature, too, was permeated by a rare spirit of youth ; and when her eye rested, 
absorbed and contemplative, upon an object, it had the 
clearness and dreamy sweetness of the gaze of a child. She 
was a product of the border : southern vivacity and northern gravity had resulted in a restless mixture ; she was fond 
of musing, and, playful as a young animal, was capable of 
arousing in men of all sorts desire mingled with shyness. 

The flood of reports concerning the death of the lawyer 
Fualdes left her, at first, unmoved, although her father, by 
his purchase of the domain of La Morne, seemed directly 
interested in the happenings, and new accounts were 
brought to the chateau daily. The occurrence was too complicated for her, and everything connected with it smelt 
too much of the unclean. Only when the name of Bastide 
Ghrammont was first mentioned did she prick up her ears, 
follow the affair, and have her father or the servants report 
to her the supposed course of events, displaying more interest than astonishment.
She knew nothing about Bastide Graminont. Nevertheless, his name, as soon as she heard it, fell like a weight 
upon her watchful soul. She began to make inquiries about 
him, ventured upon secret rides to La Morne, and led one or 
another of his servants to talk about him; nay, once she 
even succeeded in speaking with Charlotte Arlabosse, who 
was free again at that time. What she learned aroused 
a strange, pained astonishment ; she had a feeling of having 
missed an important meeting. 

In addition, she suddenly remembered having seen him. 
It must have been he, if she but half comprehended the 
confused descriptions of his person. It was a year ago, 
one early morning in the first days of spring. Seized by 
the general unrest with which the vernal season stirs the 
blood and rouses the sleeper sooner than his wont, she had 
wandered from the chateau, over the vine-clad hills, into 
the woody vale of Rolx. And as she strode through the 
dewy underbrush glistening with sunshine, above her the 
warbling of birds and the glowing blue of the celestial 
dome, beneath her the earth breathing like a sentient being, 
she caught sight of a man of powerful build who was standing erect, bareheaded, with nose in the air, and was enjoying with a preternatural eagerness, with distended gaze, all 
that lay open for enjoyment — the scents, the sun, the 
intoxicating dewiness, the splendor of the heavens. He 
seemed to scent it all, sniffing like a dog or a deer, and while 
his upturned face bore an expression of unfettered, smiling 
satisfaction, his arms, hanging by his side, trembled as in 
a spasm. 

She was frightened then ; she fled without his perceiving 
her, without his hearing the sound of her footsteps. Now 
the picture assumed a different significance. Often when 
she was alone she would abandon herself to a fancied image 
of that hour: how she had gone forward to meet the singular being, and by skilfully planned questions beguiled 
answer upon answer from his stubborn lips, and how, unable to disguise his feelings any longer, he had spontane-
ously opened his heart to her. 
