
And one night he came 
riding on a wild steed, forced his way into the castle, took 
her and rode away with her so swiftly that it seemed as if 
the storm was his servant, and lent wings to his steed. 
When the talk at table or in company turned upon Bastide 
Grammont and his murderous crime, of which no one stood 
in doubt, Clarissa never occupied herself with the enormity 
of the deed, which must forever separate such a man from 
the fellowship of the good. Enveloped in a voluptuous 
mist, she was sensible of the influence of his compelling 
force, of the heroic soul that spoke in his gestures, of the 
reality of his existence and the possibility of a close 
approach to the figure which persisted in haunting her 
troubled dreams. She was frightened at herself ; she gazed 
into the dreaded depths of her soul, and she often felt as 
if she herself were lying in prison and Bastide were walking back and forth outside, planning means for forcing the 
door, while his swift steed was neighing in triumph. 

Now she was entangled in all the talk, whisperings, and 
tales, and the whole mass of abominations, too, in which 
design and arbitrariness were hopelessly mingled, passed, 
steadily growing, before her. The thing had an increasingly strange effect upon her, and she felt as if she were 
breathing poisoned air; she would walk through one of the 
streets of Rodez and fancy that all eyes were fastened upon 
her in accusation, so that she hastened her steps, hurried 
home, pale and confused, and gazed at herself in the mirror 
with faltering pulse. 

She had recently been entertained at the estate of a 
family on terms of friendship with her father. One day 
the master of the house, a scholar, was thrown into great 
agitation over the loss of a valuable manuscript. The 
servants were ordered to ransack every room, but no one 
was suspected of theft. Clarissa fell by and by into a 
painful state; she imagined that she was suspected; in 
every word she felt a sting, in every look a question ; she 
took part in the search with anxious zeal, fevered visions
of prison and disgrace already floated before her, she 
longed to hasten to her father, to assert her innocence — 
when suddenly the manuscript was found under some old 
books ; Clarissa breathed again as if saved from peril of 
death, and never before had she been as witty, talkative, 
and captivatingly lovable as in the hours that followed. 

When in the imagination of the multitude the lady with 
the green feathers grew steadily more distinct, along with 
the other figures implicated in the brutal slaughter of poor 
Fualdes, Clarissa was thrown into a consternation with 
which she only trifled at first, as if to test herself in a probability or balance herself upon a possibility, like a lad who 
with a pleasing shudder ventures upon the frozen surface 
of a stream to test its firmness. She devoured the repprts 
in the newspapers. 
