
The timorous dallying grew into a 
haunting idea, chiefly owing to the fact that she really was 
the possessor of a hat with green feathers. That circumstance could not be regarded as remarkable. Fashion permitted the use of green, yellow, or red feathers ; nevertheless, the possession of the hat became a torment to Clarissa. 
She dared no longer touch it; it seemed to her as if the 
feathers were enveloped in a bloody lustre, and she finally 
hid it in a lumber-room under the roof. She busied herself with plans of travel, and meant to visit Paris ; but her 
resolution grew more shaky every day. Meanwhile June 
set in. A traveling theatrical company gave a number of 
performances in Rodez, and an officer by the name of Clemendot, who had long been pursuing Clarissa with declarations of love, but who had always, on account of his commonplaceness and evident crudity, been coolly, nay, at times 
ignominiously repulsed, brought her a ticket and invited 
her to accompany him to the theatre. She declined, but at 
the last moment she felt a desire to go, and had to suffer 
Captain Clemendot's taking the vacant seat to her right, 
after the rise of the curtain. 

The troupe presented a melodrama, whose action dragged 
out at great length and with great gusto the misfortune
and gruesome murder of an innocent youth. At the close 
of the last act a woman disguised as a man appeared upon 
the scene ; she wore a pointed round hat, and a mask covered her face. A hurried love-scene, carried on in whispers, 
by the light of the dismal lamp of a criminal quarter, with 
the chief of the band of murderers, sealed the fate of the 
unhappy victim, who was kneeling in prayer. In the house 
an eager silence reigned, all eyes were burning. Clarissa 
seemed to hear the hundred hearts beat like so many hammers; she grew hot and cold, every feeling of the real 
present vanished, and when, in the ensuing interval, Captain Clemendot in his half humble, half impudent way 
became importunate, a shudder ran through her body, and 
at the fumes of wine which he exhaled she came near fainting. Suddenly she threw back her head, fixed her gaze 
upon his muddled, besotted countenance and asked in a 
low, sharp, hurried tone : " What would you say, Captain, 
if it were I — I — who was present at the Bancal house? " 

Captain Clemendot turned pale. His mouth opened 
slowly, his cheeks quivered, his eyes glistened with fear, 
and when Clarissa broke into a soft, mocking, but not quite 
natural, laugh, he rose and, with an embarrassed farewell, 
left her. He was a simple man, as illiterate as a drummer, 
and, like everybody else in Rodez, completely under the 
sway of the blood-curdling reports. When the performance was at an end, he approached Clarissa, who, with an 
impassive air, was making her way to the exit, and asked 
whether she had been trying to jest with him, and she, her 
lips dry, and something like a prying hatred in her eyes, 
answered, laughing again: "No, no, Captain." After 
that her face resumed its earnest, almost sad, expression 
and her head dropped on her breast. 

Clemendot went home with a disturbed mind, thoroughly 
convinced that he had received an important confession. 
He felt in duty bound to speak out, and unbosomed himself 
next morning to a comrade. The latter drew a second 
friend into the secret, they deliberated together, and by
noon the magistrate had been informed. Monsieur Jausion 
had the Captain and Madame Mirabel summoned. After 
long and singular reflection Clarissa declared that the 
whole thing was a joke, and the magistrate was obliged to 
dismiss her for the present. 
