Clarissa believed she remembered having spent the evening of the nineteenth of March with the Pal family, in 
Rodez; she believed she remembered that Madame Pai 
herself remarked to her the following day : " We were 
so merry yesterday, and perhaps at that very time poor 
Fualdes was being murdered." Upon referring to this, 
the Pals made a positive denial of everything ; they denied 
that Clarissa had paid them a visit ; nay, in their vague, 
cowardly fright, they even declared that they had been on 
bad terms with Madame Mirabel for years. 

To human pity spirits blinded by fear and delusion were 
no longer accessible. Even had the sound sense of a single 
individual attempted resistance, it would have been useless ; 
t he giant avalanche could not be stayed. A diabolical plot 
was concocted, and it was the Prefect, Count d'Estournel, 
who perfected it in such wise that it promised the best 
success. Toward one o'clock at night a carriage drove into 
the castle grounds; Clarissa was compelled to enter it; 
the President, the Magistrate, the Prefect, were her companions. The carriage stopped in front of the Bancal 
house. Monsieur Seguret led his daughter into the ground 
floor room on the left, a cave-like chamber, gloomy as a bad 
conscience. On the shelf over the stove there stood a miserable little lamp whose light fell on two sheriff's officers and a 
lawyer's clerk, with stern countenances, leaning against the 
wall. The windows were hung with rags, the alcoves were 
pitchy dark, a mute silence reigned throughout the house. 

" Do you know this place ? " asked the Prefect with 
solemn deliberation. All turned their gaze upon Clarissa. 
In order to soften the frightful tension of her breast, she 
listened to the rain, which was beating against the wall 
outside ; all her senses seemed to have gathered in her ear 
to that end. Her body grew limp, her tongue refused to 
utter more than " no " or " yes," and since the first promised new torment and agony, but the latter perchance peace, 
she breathed a "yes:" a little word, born of fear and 
exhaustion, and, scarce alive, winged with a mysterious 
power. Her mind, confused and consumed with longing, 
turned a phantom image, the creation of a thousand effervescent brains, into an actual experience. The half consciously heard, half distractedly read, became a burning 
reality. Her existence seemed strangely entangled in that 
of the man of the wood and dale, who had ferventlv lifted 
his head to heaven, and sniffed in the air with the expression of a thirsting animal. Now she stood upon the bridge 
which led to his domain; she beheld herself sitting at his 
feet, drops of blood from his outstretched hand fell upon 
her bowed head. Consternation on the one hand, and the 
most radiant hope on the other, seized her heart, while 
between there flamed like a torch, there rang out exultant 
like a battle-cry, the name Bastide Grammont, a plaything 
for her dreams. 

An expression of relief flitted over the faces of the men 
upon this first syllable of a significant confession. President Seguret covered his eyes with his hand. He resolved 
in his heart to renounce his love for his misguided child. 
Clarissa felt it; all the ties which had hitherto bound her 
were broken. 
