
The gentlemen led Clarissa to the carriage, as she was
scarcely able to walk. At home she lapsed into a peculiar 
state. First she lay back lethargically in a chair ; suddenly 
she sprang up and cried : " Take away the murderers ! " 
The door opened and the terrified face of a servant appeared in the crack. All the domestics stood waiting in the 
hall, most of them resolved to leave the President's service. 
Clarissa saw herself deprived of all the protection of love, 
and cast out from the circle where birth is respected and 
binding forms are recognized as the least of duties. She 
was exposed to every 7 eye, the boldest gaze could pry into 
her inmost soul, she had become a public object, nothing 
about her was any longer her own, she herself could no 
longer find herself, find anything in herself upon which 
she could lean, she was branded, without and within, food 
for the general prurience, tossed defenselessly upon the 
filthy floods of gossip, the centre of a fearful occurrence 
from which she could no more dissever her thoughts. Sadness, grief, anxiety, scorn, these were no longer feelings 
for her, her blood coursed too wildly for that ; uncertainty 
of herself dominated her, doubts as to her perception, 
doubts as to visible things in general; and now and then 
she would prick her finger with a needle just to feel the 
pain, which would serve as evidence of her being awake 
and might preserve her heart from decay. Added to this, 
the torment she suffered from the intrusive : appeals to tell 
the truth, the jeers from below, the command from above, 
the thirst for revenge and the ineffaceableness of a word 
once spoken; lastly, she saw the whole world filled with 
red tongues, ceaselessly chattering; bloody tongues with 
snakeliko movements, directed toward her; every object 
she touched turned into a slippery tongue. Human countenances grew dim, save one, which, despite guilt and condemnation, was enthroned, in heroic suffering, high above 
the others, nay, appeared preeminent through his guilt as 
well as his defiance. And the day she was told that sli< i 
was to confront Bastido Orammont in order to accuse him, 
her pulses beal in joyous measure again for the first time, 
and she arrayed herself as if for a festival.