[EFORE dawn the lawyer rose from his bed, 
and at that very moment a thousand little 
birds, who lived in his room, began to twitter 
and trill. "Awake so early, little ones!" 
whispered the lawyer. He never spoke aloud. 
" Well, good morning! Hush! Hush! " 

And the thousand little birds chirped in answer and then 
obediently stopped singing. 

The lawyer wrapped a thick woolen shawl around his 
shoulders, for he was always very cold, slipped his feet 
into his wadded boots, drew on his gloves, put his fur cap 
on his bald head and went out of the house. 

It was still night and everything looked unreal and 
magical. Now and then the grass would bow down with 
a sudden jerk, as people do in their sleep, if they dream 
that they are falling, and then for a moment the lawyer 
would feel a warm breath, which vanished as suddenly as 
it came. A confused mass of gray and black clouds swept 
rapidly across the sky and at the zenith three golden stars 
were visible in a line, so that they looked like a flying spear 
darting through the clouds. The lawyer gazed thoughtfully for some moments at the flying spear while his mind 
struggled with some dim idea. Then he hurried with short 
shuffling steps as quietly as possible along the sandy paths 
of the asylum gardens. 

" Hush, keep still! " he whispered, as he passed some 
bushes in which something was stirring. 

At the edge of the kitchen-garden there was an old well 
with a pump which was no longer used, and here the lawyer 
began his task. He put the watering-pot under the spout 
and began to pump, trying to make no noise. As there 
was but little water in the well and the lawyer pumped 
slowly and cautiously, it took him half an hour to fill the 
pot. Then, panting and coughing, the little man carried 
it to the garden beds, and began to water the flowers, smiling happily and speaking lovingly to them meanwhile. 
"Don't be in such a hurry, little ones," he whispered, 
"my dear children, how you drink! Good morning! " 

But just then began a great fluttering and stirring in an 
elder bush. Hundreds of little birds suddenly thrust their 
heads out between the leaves and chirped to the lawyer. 

He made a startled gesture. " For heaven's sake, be 
quiet! " said he. " You are always trying to be the first! 
Every morning. Hush !  And immediately silence reigned 
in the elder bush. 
