
The lawyer went quietly from bed to bed and watered 
his flowers. He stopped frequently to draw a deep breath 
and gazed up at the sky, where the motionless golden spear 
still seemed to be darting through the clouds. He pondered for some time over that and shook his head. From 
the " violent ward " came a longdrawn wailing, which at 
regular intervals was merged in pitiful weeping. But the 
lawyer paid no attention to these sounds. He only heard 
the birds fluttering their wings and whetting their beaks 
in the bushes. 

A night nurse passed by, shivering. 

"Already at work, so early? " said she, turning her pale 
face toward him. 

The lawyer put down his watering-pot, bowed and took 
off his cap. " One must keep at it," he whispered, " the 
little ones will not wait." 

Thon he bogan with the tenderest care to water the beds 
beside the principal buildings. He paused by the open 
windows of the kitchen, which were very low, and examined 
the window-sills. He shook his head and seemed much
grieved and disappointed. Yes, they had once more forgotten to put out the bread crumbs for his birds! How 
could any one rely upon such maids? 

He hunted up a couple of little pebbles on the path and 
threw them, one at a time, into the dark kitchen, laughing 
softly to himself. They really must learn to be more careful. Oh, he would soon teach them to put the bread crumbs 
regularly on the window-sill. There was plenty of gravel 
on the path. And what if they had already complained 
so often! 

The watering-pot was empty and in the gray light of 
dawn the lawyer walked back to the well. 

Ever since his wife's death the poor man had been a 
friend of birds and flowers. When she was dying, she had 
said, with her last breath, " The flowers must always be 
watered and the birds must always be fed." Those had 
been her last words and the lawyer heard them ringing in 
his ears day and night. He heard them in every breeze, 
in every conversation, even when all was silent they were 
wafted to him. In his wife's room there had stood a dark, 
heavy clothes press (which, oddly enough, he could still 
remember), and this large, dark object also repeated his 
wife's last words, although it made no sound whatever. 
The lawyer continued to live in seclusion and solitude, 
and watered the flowers in the window-boxes and fed and 
watered the birds in the cages. 
