
The flowers withered and 
the birds died, one by one. The lawyer took no notice of 
his loss. Indeed it seemed to him as if the birds were 
hopping and twittering gaily in their cages. They hatched 
their young and kept on increasing. And the lawyer took 
a childlike pleasure in this increase. Finally there were 
hundreds, thousands, whose chirping he heard from morning till night. They lived in the walls, on the ceiling, everywhere. And the good man could not understand why others 
neither saw nor heard them. 

As the sun rose, the lawyer had already finished a good 
part of his day's work and turned back to the ward, which 
looked like a country cottage standing in a pretty garden.
In the doorway, leaning against the doorpost, Michael 
Petroff, a former officer in the Russian army, stood smiling, 
and greeted him with a bright, cheerful " Good morning, 
my friend !  

The lawyer in his w T oolen shawl, scarf and wadded boots, 
bowed and touched his cap. 

44 Good morning, Captain! " 

They bowed several times, for they respected each other 
highly, and shook hands only after the completion of this 
ceremony. 

" Did you sleep well, Herr Advokat? " asked Michael 
Petroff, bending forward a little and smiling pleasantly. 

4 ' Did I sleep well ? Yes, thank you.  

44 I too passed an excellent night," Michael Petroff continued with a bright happy laugh.  Really excellent. I 
had a dream — ," he added, smiling and gazing out into the 
garden with his right eye half closed. "Yes, indeed! — 
Now do come into my office, my friend. I have news. After 
you ! " He laid his hand on the little lawyer 's shoulder 
and with a slight bow allowed him to pass in first. 

Captain Michael Petroff was a tall slender man with 
cheerful steel-blue eyes and a small blond mustache, which 
like his soft, blond, parted hair, was beginning to turn 
white. He was dressed with scrupulous neatness and was 
carefully shaved. His chin was round and exquisitely 
formed, though a trifle weak, the modeling of his mouth 
was unusually fine and delicate, like that of a mere boy. 

44 Please be seated," said Michael Petroff, while with a 
gesture he invited the lawyer to sit on the sofa. 
