
44 But perhaps I am intruding? " whispered the lawyer, 
and remained standing. 

44 No, indeed ! How could you — ? " And Michael Petroff led the lawyer over to the sofa. The little man sat 
down timidly, looking gratefully up at his host. "You 
are so very busy- I know — ," said lie, and nodded at the 
writing table, which was heaped with documents, newspapers, and manuscripts.
" I have plenty to do," added Michael Petroff, with a 
curious smile on his pretty boyish lips. " But one has 
always time for one's friends. Here, do listen! I have 
just outlined a petition to the Hessian government — ," 
Michael Petroff smiled and balanced a sheet of paper on 
his hand — lt The Hessian government is to be urgently 
requested, most — urgently — requested, to reconsider the 
verdict in the case of a teacher! " 

Michael Petroff glanced at his guest while four deep lines 
suddenly appeared on his forehead. " This teacher," he 
went on, " was sentenced to four years' imprisonment, only 
think — four years. He had ten mouths to feed and he 
embezzled some funds. Voila tout! What do you think 
of that ! Ha, ha ! That is the way of the world, you see ! 
In my petition I demand not merely that the sentence 
should be revoked, but also that officers' salaries should be 
increased. I demand it — I, Captain Michael Petroff, and 
I shall also appear in the Non-Partisan. You will see, my 
friend! " Michael Petroff cast a fearless, triumphant 
glance at the little baldheaded lawyer, who listened and 
nodded, although he did not quite understand what the 
Captain meant. 

" You do a great deal of good! " he whispered, nodding, 
while a childish smile flitted t)ver his sad, pale little face. 
And after a moment's reflection he added, " You are a good 
man. You surely are! " 

Michael Petroff shook his head. " I do ray duty! " he 
declared earnestly. And laying his hand on his heart while 
his clear steel-blue eyes flashed, he added :  My sacred 
duty! " 

Captain Michael Petroff, former officer in a St. Petersburg regiment, considered it his life work to plead for 
justice in this world. He called himself " The Tribunal 
of right and justice." He subscribed for two large daily 
papers, and searched them every day for cases in which, 
according to his judgment, injustice had been done to 
some one. And every day Michael Petroff found cases. 
Cases and nothing but cases. These cases he cut out,
arranged them in chronological order and immediately 
went to work on them. 
