
He often sat up late in his office, as he called his room, 
or in his editorial sanctum, as he sometimes designated it 
in an undertone when speaking to his confidential friend. 
There he would sit and write, in a hand as neat as copper-plate, his memorials, protests, petitions, which he delivered 
every day at six o'clock to the head physician, Dr. Marz. 
who had undertaken to forward them regularly. Dr. Marz 
was glad to receive these manuscripts which he laid in a 
separate pigeonhole, in order to use them from time to 
time as material for his work on Graphomania. 

The little time that this activity left him, Michael Petroff 
employed in editing his newspaper. And it was because of 
this paper that he sometimes secretly referred to his room 
as "his editorial sanctum. " This newspaper did not 
appear regularly, but only when it happened to be ready. 
It usually appeared once a year, but sometimes twice, if 
his nervous condition urged him to greater haste. 

Michael Petroff 's paper was a fairly accurate representation of an ordinary daily paper, from the heading, in 
which the conditions of subscription were stated, as well 
as the name of the city in which the paper appeared — the 
city was arbitrarily chosen by Michael Petroff — to the 
fictitious names of the publisher and editor. Like any 
other paper, it contained advertisements, which Michael 
Petroff simply cut out of other papers, a leading article, 
and contributions. The whole editorial part, however, was 
engaged — with the exception of a few articles which were 
slipped in as a disguise — with the question: Is the confinement of Michael Petroff, Captain in the Russian army, 
justified? The titles of the separate articles varied from 
year to year, although the ideas expressed in them were 
similar. The Russian government's Ultimatum ! — A letter 
from tho Czar to the head physician, Dr. Marz! And every 
year the paper appeared under a different name. Michael 
Petroff called it The Eye of tlt<> World, The Conscience of 
Europe, The Bayonet.
Michael Petroff made no secret of his petitions, but he 
spoke of his newspaper only to his confidant, the lawyer. 
And although he was naturally friendly and very kindhearted, possibly the reason he was so extremely fond of 
the lawyer was that he could talk to him about his paper. 

" Just a moment, my friend," said he. " There is such 
news! I want to tell you the very latest. Please stay." 

He went to the door and cleared his throat and listened. 
Then he stepped out into the corridor, coughed, looked up 
and down and came back satisfied. He drew out the editorial drawer, the key of which he wore around his neck, 
and with a happy laugh began :  The very latest ! Listen ! 
This cannot fail to have its effect. Just hear the headline : 
Doctor Marz arrested! " 

" Dr. Marz arrested? " whispered the lawyer anxiously, 
looking up at Petroff in open-mouthed astonishment. 
