
Michael Petroff laughed. 

" Arrested? No, of course not. I go on to explain in 
the article that Dr. Miirz is going to be arrested, and that 
the only way for him to escape arrest is to give Michael 
Petroff his discharge immediately." 

The lawyer nodded. " I see," said he, smiling because 
he saw Petroff looking so cheerful. And yet he was not 
thinking anything about Petroff 's article, but only that he 
must give the birds their water. He grew restless and 
started to rise. 

" Just a moment, please! " said Michael Petroff eagerly. 
" Yes, it is really an excellent idea," he continued rapidly, 
while his cheeks flushed with joy. " In my article I emphasize the fact that Dr. Marz is an honorable man and a 
highly prized and respected physician, so that his conduct 
in this particular case causes widespread astonishment. 
I should like to ask you, my friend, what he will do when 
he reads this article? Ha, ha, ha! They will find out 
something, my dear fellow. I am not going to be unkind 
to him, not in the least. Well, in fact, in fact, I shall say, 
my dear Doctor, ha, ha ! But just look at this too, in the 
Non-Partisan. Only look at this title, will you please ! ' 
"Which one—?" 

"Why, this one!" 

" An interrogation point? " 

 Yes ! Ha, ha — Simply an interrogation point ! And 
beneath that: Where is Michael Petroff? An appeal to 
the public! But look at this, in the little Feuilleton: 
Michael Petroff, a Captain in the Russian army, has just 
completed his six-volume work on Shooting Stars. All 
the scientific journals are praising the clearness and 
acumen of this epoch-making work. Ha, ha, ha, didn't I 
tell you that there was news, my friend! " 

The lawyer crouched in the sofa corner and made such 
an effort to think, that he held his breath. 

"I don't understand — ?" he whispered and slowly 
shook his head. 

" What don't you understand? " 

" That he should keep you in confinement." 

Michael Petroff glanced at the lawyer in surprise. Then 
he leaned forward and whispered: " But I have already 
told you that my relations pay him." 
