
" They pay him? " 

" Yes, of course! " answered Michael Petroff cheerfully. 
" Enormous sums. Millions! " 

" Oh! " The lawyer began to understand now. 

"Yes, you see, that is how it is in the world!" said 
Michael Petroff, and snapped his fingers. 

But the lawyer did not wholly comprehend yet. 

"I do not understand," he began again. " Dr. Marz 
is so kindhearted. I live here, I have my home and my 
food and I pay nothing. He has never asked me for any 
money. — I have no money, you know," he ended anxiously 
in a still lower tone. 

Michael Petroff laid his hand pompously but protectingly 
on his friend's shoulder. "You work in the garden," 
"-aid lie, " you water the flowers. How could he have the 
face to expect you to pay money? That is perfectly simple. 
But perhaps you too have relations outside who pay for 
you? "
" Relations? " 

" Yes. Outside — there I " A bitter smile curved Michael 
Petroff 's beautiful boyish mouth. Should he tell this little 
old man in the woolen shawl where he really was ? Should 
he perhaps explain to this little old man with the grayish 
wrinkled face, that there was an " outside " — where one 
could even get into a railway train or wash one's hands 
before sitting down to table? Suddenly he stood up on 
his tiptoes and instantly lost all conception of his own 
actual body; he seemed to himself like a gigantic tower 
rising up to the clouds, and looking down on the little bald-headed man, who had only two thin tufts of gray hair 
above his ears. He was seized with the desire to make 
the lawyer cry. 

But suddenly he bowed slightly to his friend and said: 
 Please forgive Michael Petroff! " He walked across the 
room, then turned to his guest and said in precisely his 
usual tone: " Will the fair weather last todav? " 

"I think so — I am not sure," answered the lawyer 
doubtfully. 

"Well, w r e will play cricket this afternoon. Are you 
cold? " 

 Yes,  whispered the lawyer and drew his scarf closer. 
