
Michael Petroff gazed at him with his head on one side. 
 I cannot understand how you can be cold today. ' : And 
he laughed gaily.  Come,  said he, " let us — " he paused, 
for he did not know what he wanted to do —  Let us — 
Oh yes, let us go and see Friend Engelhardt. Come! — 
The Doctor was with him last night," he ended mysteriously. 

" The Doctor?" 

"Yes. Our friend is ill. Hm, hm." Michael Petroff 
carefully locked up the manuscript of his newspaper, put 
on a big gray English traveling cap, looked in the glass, 
and they left the room together. Michael Petroff laughed 
a soft guttural laugh. At Engelhardt 's door they paused 
to listen, and then knocked. —
There were two great days in the year for Michael 
Petroff. 

One was his birthday, the sixteenth of May. Michael 
Petroff never forgot it. On May sixteenth he would walk 
about with an important air, and looking about him he 
would say to every one he met: " This is my birthday. 
I thank you for your good wishes !  The attendant always 
came before dinner and asked him to come to Dr. Marz's 
room to receive his congratulations. 

Then Michael Petroff would go, with quick, light steps 
to Dr. Marz's parlor, shake hands with him and thank him 
for the wonderful bouquet of white roses that Dr. Marz 
gave him. 

Michael never suspected where the bunch of white roses 
came from. He did not know that, on his birthday, his 
wife and daughter stood behind the portiere of the parlor, 
nor that they made the long journey every year to see him. 
The first few years the Captain's wife had had golden hair, 
but it had gradually turned gray, and now it was white, 
although she was still quite a young woman. Formerly 
she used to come alone, but for three years past she had 
always been accompanied by a young lady, who wept bitterly when she arrived and when she went away. This 
young lady had but one ear and concealed the disfigurement by the way in which she dressed her hair. Michael 
Petroff had cut off her other ear when she was only a child, 
during the first outbreak of his malady. 

Michael Petroff chatted and laughed pleasantly with the 
head physician and carried the roses to his friend, the 
lawyer. 

" Here are some flowers for you. I do not want them ! " 
