
The lawyer's eyes opened wide with delight, and he took 
the roses carefully as if they were fragile. 

Michael Petroff 's second great day was that on which 
his newspaper appeared. 

The paper was always printed in the town. Michael 
Petroff had induced the porter of the Sanatorium to under-
take this commission. The porter delivered the manuscript 
to the printer and brought back the twenty-five printed 
copies to Michael Petroff. And then for a few days he 
was in a state of the greatest excitement. He sent the 
paper to the doctors, especially to Dr. Marz, and waited in 
suspense to see what effect it would have. At such times 
he could not work, but wandered about the house and 
garden all day. If he met a doctor, he would stop and cast 
a triumphant glance at him, smiling as if secure of victory. 

But a few T days later he would question the doctors: 
" May I ask whether you have received a newspaper? " 

 A newspaper ?  

" Yes! I received it myself. The Bayonet? " 

" Oh yes, I remember now. I will take a look at it. ,! 

" Yes, please do. There may be some things in it that 
will interest you. Ha, ha, ha ! " And he laid his hand on 
the Doctor's shoulder and gazed meaningly at him. 

Finally he asked the head physician himself. 

" Yes, yes," answered he, " certainly I read that paper, 
my dear Captain. A curious thing. I made inquiries immediately, but the editors were not to be found, in spite 
of all my pains. They do not seem to be in existence. 
Or else they are gone. I scarcely know what to think of 
the paper, my dear Captain." 

Then for a few days Michael Petroff would wander disconsolately about, and his depression might even bring on 
melancholia or frenzy. But after a few davs he would 
always regain his cheerful spirits. He would greet his 
friends, and apologize for his disagreeable behavior. And 
immediately he would begin to plan out another newspaper. 
This time it must surely be a success. Take care, Dr. Marz ! 

Such was Michael Petroff, Captain in the Russian army. Friend Engelhardt, whom Michael Petroff and the lawyer 
were going to visit, was a gray-haired man about fifty 
years old, who had been only a year in Dr. Marz's sana-
torium. He was a shoemaker by trade and had sat all 
his life, year in, year out, under his glass globe of water, 
tapping away on leather. He was unmarried, lived much 
alone and since he was industrious and economical, he had 
laid up a comfortable little property. And there he sat 
under his glass globe and nothing whatever happened. 
