
But gradually the globe began to look more and more 
strange to him. It flashed upon him and dazzled him, so 
that he sometimes felt for a moment a certain unacknowledged fear of it. It seemed to grow bigger and bigger, 
until at last the time came when Engelhardt's hair stood 
on end with horror — 

And thenceforth he suffered from the strange and terrible delusion that he was the centre of the universe and that 
it was his task to keep the whole world in equilibrium. 
The myriad forces of all creation were united in him and 
he felt with agonizing constancy, how the suns and the 
planets were circling about him, and how everything was 
rushing and whirling through space. If a chain of skaters 
revolves around one man who is in the middle, that man 
will feel the extraordinary force with which the two rushing wings whirl around him, and he will be obliged to exert 
all his strength to maintain his position. Engelhardt felt 
precisely so and since his efforts were unremitting, his 
delusion exhausted him to such an extent, that in one year 
he had aged as if in ten. Even if — so he said — the 
heavenlv bodies had been so marvelouslv ordained by the 
almighty Creator, that through all eternity they revolved 
in their foreordained circles and spirals (as he said), yet 
he suffered beyond endurance from the slightest disturbance in outer space. During the winter he had been unable 
to sleep for two weeks, because a swiftly moving star was 
pulling at him. Curiously enough, at this very time a 
comet appeared which astonished all the astronomers. 
Just then Schwindt, an attendant, had died under peculiar 
circumstances and Engelhardt — as he himself said — had 
drunk in his soul, from which he had gained fresh strength, 
sufficient to last him throughout the spring and summer. 
But now again his task was wearing him out more every 
day and his powers were failing rapidly. The shooting 
stars and the swarms of meteors dragged at him, until he 
became dizzy, and especially the moon exerted at this 
period a terrible power over him. It sucked in his strength, 
and Engelhardt imagined that at any moment the ground 
might give way beneath him and he might sink into the 
depths and the whole universe might collapse above him. 

When Michael PetrofT and the little lawyer entered 
Engelhardt 's room, after vainly knocking at the door for 
some time, they found him in bed, with his thin hairy hands 
lying helplessly on the coverlet. He was gazing directly 
upward, and indeed his eyes were rolled up so far that the 
whites showed, and he seemed to be looking fixedly at some 
special point in the ceiling. His face was of a somewhat 
yellowish tone and gave the impression of being made of 
porcelain, the skin was so smooth and the bones were so 
prominent. His forehead was uncommonly large in proportion to his small face and mouth, which was drawn 
together as if ready to whistle and was surrounded by 
many little lines centering at the lips. The shoemaker 
had wasted away so during the year that the collar of his 
bright colored shirt stood out a finger's breadth from his 
thin neck. 

"Good morning!" said Michael PetrofT gently and 
cheerfully. " Here are some friends to see you! " The 
lawyer remained timidly standing in the doorway. 

Engelhardt did not answer. A shudder passed over him, 
and his thin hairy hands twitched from time to time, as if 
he were receiving an electric shock of varying strength. 