The town of Diisseldorf is very beautiful, and if 
you think of it when far away, and happen at 
the same time to have been born there, strange 
feelings come over your soul. I was born 
there, and feel as if I must go straight home. 
And when I say hotne I mean the Bolkerstrasse and the 
house in which I was born. This house will some day be 
a great curiosity, and I have sent word to the old lady who 
owns it that she must not for her life sell it. For the whole 
house she would now hardly get as much as the tips which 
the distinguished green-veiled English ladies will one day 
give the servant girl when she shows them the room where 
I was born, and the hen-house wherein my father generally 
imprisoned me for stealing grapes, and also the brown door 
on which my mother taught me to write with chalk — 
Lord! Madame, should I ever become a famous author, it 
has cost my poor mother trouble enough. 

But my fame as yet slumbers in the marble quarries of 
Carrara; the waste-paper laurel with which they have be- 
decked my brow has not yet spread its perfume through 
the wide world, and the green-veiled English ladies, when 
they come to Diisseldorf as yet leave the celebrated house 
unvisited, and go directly to the market-place and there 
gaze on the colossal black equestrian statue which stands 
in its midst. This is supposed to represent the Prince 
Elector, Jan Wilhelm. He wears black armor and a long 
wig hanging down his back. When a boy, I heard the legend
that the artist who made this statue became aware, to his 
horror, while it was being cast, that he had not metal 
enough to fill the mold, and then all the citizens of the town 
came running with all their silver spoons, and threw them 
in to make up the deficiency; and I often stood for hours 
before the statue wondering how many spoons were con- 
cealed in it, and how many apple-tarts the silver would buy. 
Apple-tarts were then my passion — now it is love, truth, 
liberty, and crab-soup — and not far from the statue of the 
Prince Elector, at the theatre corner, generally stood a 
curiously constructed bow-legged fellow with a white apron, 
and a basket girt around him full of delightfully steaming 
apple-tarts, whose praises he well knew how to call out in 
an irresistible high treble voice, ' * Here you are ! hot apple- 
tarts! just from the oven — smelling deliciously ! " Truly, 
whenever in my later years the Evil One sought to get the 
better of me, he always spoke in just such an enticing high 
treble voice, and I should certainly have never remained 
twelve full hours with the Signora Giulietta, if she had not 
thrilled me with her sweet perfumed apple-tart tones. And, 
in fact, the apple-tarts would never have so sorely tempted 
me if the crooked Hermann had not covered them up so 
mysteriously with his white apron; and it is aprons, you 
know, which — but I wander from the subject. I was speak- 
ing of the equestrian statue which has so many silver spoons 
in it, and no soup, and which represents the Prince Elector, 
Jan Wilhelm. 

He was a brave gentleman, 'tis reported, a lover of art 
and handy therein himself. He founded the picture-gal- 
lery in Diisseldorf ; and in the observatory there, they still 
show us an extremely artistic piece of work, consisting of 
one wooden cup within another which he himself had carved 
in his leisure hours, of which latter he had every day four- 
and-twenty. 

In those days princes were not the harassed creatures 
they now are. Their crowns grew firmly on their heads. 