It was as yet very early in the morning when I left Gottingen, and the learned , beyond doubt, still lay 

in bed, dreaming as usual that he wandered in a fair garden, amid the beds of which grew innumerable white pa- i 
pers written over with citations. On these the sun shone 
cheerily, and he plucked up several here and there and laboriously planted them in new beds, while the sweetest 
songs of the nightingales rejoiced his old heart. 

Before the Weender Gate I met two small native schoolboys, one of whom was saying to the other, "I don't intend 
to keep company any more with Theodore; he is a low 
blackguard, for yesterday he didn't even know the genitive 
of Mensa." Insignificant as these words may appear, I 
still regard them as entitled to be recorded — nay, I would even write them as town-motto on the gate of Gottingen, 
for the young birds pipe as the old ones sing, and the expression accurately indicates the narrow, petty academic 
pride so characteristic of the "highly learned" Georgia 
Augusta.

The fresh morning air blew over the highroad, the birds 
sang cheerily, and, little by little, with the breeze and the 
birds, my mind also became fresh and cheerful. Such refreshment was sorely needed by one who had long been 
confined in the Pandect stable. Roman casuists had covered my soul with gray cobwebs ; my heart was as though 
jammed between the iron paragraphs of selfish systems of 
jurisprudence ; there was an endless ringing in my ears of 
such sounds as "Tribonian, Justinian, Hermogenian, and 
Blockheadian," and a sentimental brace of lovers seated 
under a tree appeared to me like an edition of the Corpus 
Juris with closed clasps. The road began to take on a more 
lively appearance. Milkmaids occasionally passed, as did 
also donkey-drivers with their gray pupils. Beyond 
Weende I met the ''Shepherd" and "Doris." This is not 
the idyllic pair sung by Gessner, but the duly and comfortably appointed university beadles, whose duty it is to keep 
watch and ward so that no students fight duels in Bovden, 
and, above all, that no new ideas (such as are generally 
obliged to remain in quarantine for several decades outside 
of Gottingen) are smuggled in by speculative private lecturers. Shepherd greeted me as one does a colleague, for 
he, too, is an author, who has frequently mentioned my 
name in his semi-annual writings. In addition to this, I 
may mention that when, as was frequently the case, he came 
to cite me before the university court and found me "not 
at home," he was always kind enough to write the citation 
with chalk upon my chamber door. Occasionally a one-horse vehicle rolled along, well packed with students, who 
were leaving for the vacation or forever.