Beyond Norten the sun flashed high in heaven. His intentions toward me were evidently good, and he warmed my 
brain until all the unripe thoughts which it contained came 
to full growth. The pleasant Sun Tavern in Norten is not 
to be despised, either; I stopped there and found dinner 
ready. All the dishes were excellent and suited me far better than the wearisome, academical courses of saltless, leath- 
ery dried fish and cabbage rechauffe, which were served to 
me in Gottingen. After I had somewhat appeased my appetite, I remarked in the same room of the tavern a gentleman and two ladies, who were about to depart. The cava- 
lier was clad entirely in green; he even had on a pair of 
green spectacles which cast a verdigris tinge upon his copper-red nose. The gentleman's general appearance was 
like what we may presume King Nebuchadnezzar's to have 
been in his later years, when, according to tradition, he ate 
nothing but salad, like a beast of the forest. The Green 
One requested me to recommend him to a hotel in Gottingen, and I advised him, when there, to inquire of the first 
convenient student for the Hotel de Briibach. One lady was 
evidently his wife — an altogether extensively constructed 
dame, gifted with a rubicund square mile of countenance, 
with dimples in her cheeks which looked like spittoons for 
cupids. A copious double chin appeared below, like an 
imperfect continuation of the face, while her high-piled 
bosom, which was defended by stiff points of lace and al 
many-cornered collar, as if by turrets and bastions, reminded one of a fortress. Still, it is by no means certain that
this fortress would have resisted an ass laden with gold, 
jany more than did that of which Philip of Macedon spoke. 
The other lady, her sister, seemed her extreme antitype. 
If the one were descended from Pharaoh's fat kine, the 
other was as certainly derived from the lean. Her face 
was but a mouth between two ears; her breast was as inconsolably comfortless and dreary as the Liineburger heath; 
while her absolutely dried-up figure reminded one of a 
charity table for poor theological students. Both ladies 
asked me, in a breath, if respectable people lodged in the 
Hotel de Briibach. I assented to this question with a clear 
conscience, and as the charming trio drove away I waved 
my hand to them many times from the window. The landlord of The Sun laughed, however, in his sleeve, being probably aware that the Hotel de Briibach was a name bestowed 
by the students of Gottingen upon their university prison. 
Beyond Nordheim mountain ridges begin to appear, and 
the traveler occasionally meets with a picturesque eminence. The wayfarers whom I encountered were principally peddlers, traveling to the Brunswick fair, and among 
them there was a group of women, every one of whom bore 
on her back an incredibly large cage nearly as high as a 
house, covered over with white linen. In this cage were 
every variety of singing birds, which continually chirped 
and sung, while their bearers merrily hopped along and 
chattered together. It seemed droll thus to behold one 
bird carrying others to market.