After proceeding a little distance, I met with a traveling 
journeyman who came from Brunswick, and who related 
to me that it was generally believed in that city that their 
young Duke had been taken prisoner by the Turks during 
his tour in the Holy Land, and could be ransomed only by 
an enormous sum. The extensive travels of the Duke probably originated this tale. The people at large still preserve 
that traditional fable-loving train of ideas which is so pleasantly shown in their "Duke Ernest." The narrator of this 
news was a tailor, a neat little youth, but so thin that the 
stars might have shone through him as through Ossian's 
misty ghosts. Altogether, he was made up of that eccentric 
mixture of humor and melancholy peculiar to the German 
people. This was especially expressed in the droll and affecting manner in which he sang that extraordinary popular 
ballad, "A beetle sat upon the hedge, sumni, summ!" There 
is one fine thing about us Germans — no one is so crazy but 
that he may find a crazier comrade who will understand 
him. Only a German can appreciate that song, and in the 
same breath laugh and cry himself to death over it. On
this occasion I also remarked the depth to which the words 
of Goethe have penetrated the national life. My lean comrade trilled occasionally as he went along — "Joyful and 
sorrowful, thoughts are free!" Such a corruption of text 
is usual among the multitude. He also sang a song in which 
"Lottie by the grave of Werther" wept. The tailor ran 
over with sentimentalism in the words — 

"Sadly by the rose-beds now I weep, 
Where the late moon found us oft alone I 
Moaning where the silver fountains sleep. 
Once which whispered joy in every tone." 

The hills here became steeper, the fir-woods below were 
like a green sea, and white clouds above sailed along over 
the blue sky. The wildness of the region was, as it were, 
tamed by its uniformity and the simplicity of its elements. 
Nature, like a true poet, abhors abrupt transitions. Clouds, 
however fantastically formed they may at times appear, 
still have a white, or at least a subdued hue, harmoniously 
corresponding with the blue heaven and the green earth ; so 
that all the colors of a landscape blend into one another like 
soft music, and every glance at such a natural picture tranquilizes and reassures the soul. The late Hofmann would 
have painted the clouds spotted and chequered. And, like 
a great poet, Nature knows how to produce the greatest effects with the most limited means. She has, after all, only a sun, trees, flowers, water, and love to work with. 
Of course, if the latter be lacking in the heart of the observer, 
the whole will, in all probability, present but a poor appearance; the sun is then only so many miles in diameter, the 
trees are good for firewood, the flowers are classified according to their stamens, and the water is wet. 