In the silver refinery, as has so frequently happened in 
life, I could get no glimpse of the precious metal. In the 
mint I succeeded better, and saw how money was made. 
Beyond this I have never been able to advance. On such 
occasions mine has invariably been the spectator's part, 
and I verily believe that, if it should rain dollars from 
heaven, the coins would only knock holes in my head, while 
the children of Israel would merrily gather up the silver 
manna. With feelings in which comic reverence was 
blended with emotion, I beheld the new-born shining dollars, 
took one in my hand as it came fresh from the stamp, and 
said to it, "Young Dollar, what a destiny awaits thee! 
What a cause wilt thou be of good and of evil! How thou 
wilt protect vice and patch up virtue! How thou wilt be 
beloved and accursed! How thou wilt aid in debauchery, 
pandering, lying, and murdering! How thou wilt restlessly 
roll along through clean and dirty hands for centuries, until 
finally, laden with tresspasses and weary with sin, thou 
wilt be gathered again unto thine own, in the bosom of an
Abraham, who will melt thee down, purify thee, and form 
thee into a new and better being, perhaps an innocent little 
tea-spoon, with which my own great-great-grandson will 
mash his porridge." 
I will narrate in detail my visit to "Dorothea" and 
"Caroline," the two principal Clausthaler mines, having 
found them very interesting. 

Half an hour away from the town are situated two large 
dingy buildings. Here the traveler is transferred to the 
care of the miners. These men wear dark and generally 
steel-blue colored jackets, of ample girth, descending to the 
hips, with pantaloons of a similar hue, a leather apron tied 
on behind, and a rimless green felt hat which resembles a 
decapitated nine-pin. In such a garb, with the exception of 
the "back-leather," the visitor is also clad, and a miner, 
his "leader," after lighting his mine-lamp, conducts him to 
a gloomy entrance resembling a chimney-hole, descends as 
far as the breast, gives him a few directions relative to 
grasping the ladder, and requests him to follow fearlessly. 
The affair is entirely devoid of danger, though it at first 
appears quite otherwise to those unacquainted with the 
mysteries of mining. Even the putting on of the dark convict-dress awakens very peculiar sensations. Then one 
must clamber down on all fours, the dark hole is so very 
dark, and Lord only knows how long the ladder may be! 
But we soon remark that this is not the only ladder descending into the black eternity, for there are many, of 
from fifteen to twenty rounds apiece, each standing upon 
a board capable of supporting a man, and from which a 
new hole leads in turn to a new ladder. I first entered the 
"Caroline," the dirtiest and most disagreeable Caroline 
with whom I ever had the pleasure of becoming acquainted. 
The rounds of the ladders were covered with wet mud. 
And from one ladder we descend to another with the guide 
ever in advance, continually assuring us that there was no 
danger so long as we held firaily to the rounds and did not 
look at our feet, and that we must not for our lives tread
on the side plank, where the buzzing barrel-rope runs, and 
where two weeks ago a careless man was knocked down, unfortunately breaking his neck by the fall.