But what was the Romantic School in Germany? 
It was nothing else but the reawakening of the 
poetry of the Middle Ages, as it had shown itself in its songs, images, 
and architecture, in art and in life. But this poetry had risen 
from Christianity; it was a passion-flower which had 
sprung from the blood of Christ. I do not know whether 
the melancholy passion-flower of Germany is known by that 
name in France, or whether popular legend attributes to it 
the same mystical origin. It is a strange, unpleasantly 
colored blossom, in whose calyx we see set forth the implements which were used in the crucifixion of Christ, such as 
the hammer, pincers, and nails — a flower which is not so 
much ugly as ghostly, and even whose sight awakens in our 
soul a shuddering pleasure, like the convulsively agreeable 
sensations which come from pain itself. From this view 
the flower was indeed the fittest symbol for Christianity 
itself, whose most thrilling chain was the luxury of pain. 
Though in France only Roman Catholicism is understood 
by the word Christianity, I must specially preface that I 
speak only of the latter. I speak of that religion in whose 
first dogmas there is a damnation of all flesh, and which 
not only allows to the spirit power over the flesh, but will 
also kill this to glorify the spirit. I speak of that religion 
by whose unnatural requisitions sin and hypocrisy really 
came into the world, in that by the condemnation of the 
flesh the most innocent sensuous pleasures became sins, and 
because the impossibility of a man's becoming altogether 
spiritual naturally created hypocrisy. I speak of that religion which, by teaching the doctrine of the casting away
of all earthly goods and of cultivating a dog-like, abject 
humility and angelic patience, became the most approved 
support of despotism. Men have found out the real life and 
meaning (Wesen) of this religion, and do not now content 
themselves with promises of supping in Paradise; they 
know that matter has also its merits, and is not all the 
devil's, and they now defend the delights of this world, this 
beautiful garden of God, our inalienable inheritance. And 
therefore, because we have grasped so entirely all the consequences of that absolute spiritualism, we may believe that 
the Christian Catholic view of the world has reached its 
end. Every age is a sphinx, which casts itself into the 
abyss when man has guessed its riddle. 

Yet we do in no wise deny the good results which this 
Christian Catholic view of the world established in Europe. 
It was necessary as a wholesome reaction against the 
cruelly colossal materialism which had developed itself in 
the Eoman realm and threatened to destroy all spiritual 
human power. As the lascivious memoirs of the last century form the pieces justificatives of the French Revolution, as the terrorism of a comite du salut public seems to 
be necessary physic when we read the confessions of the 
aristocratic world of France, so we recognize the wholesomeness of ascetic spiritualism when we read Petronius 
or Apuleius, which are to be regarded as the pieces justificatives of Christianity. 
The flesh had become so arrogant in this Roman world that it required Christian discipline to chasten it. 
After the banquet of a Trimalchion, such a hunger-cure as Christianity was a necessity