The Art-work of the Middle Ages manifests this mastery 
of mere material by mind, and it is very often its only 
mission. The epic poems of this period may be easily 
classed according to the degree of this subjection or influence. 
There can be no discussion here of lyrical and dramatic poems, for the latter did not exist, and the former 
are as like in every age as are the songs of nightingales in 
spring. 

Although the epic poetry of the Middle Ages was divided 
into sacred and profane, both were altogether Christian 
according to their kind; for if sacred poesy sang of the 
Jewish race and its history, the only race which was regarded as holy, or of the heroes and legends of the Old 
and New Testaments, and, in brief, the Church — still all the 
life of the time was reflected in profane poetry with its 
Christian views and action. The flower of the religious 
poetic art in the German Middle Ages is perhaps Barlaam 
and Josaphat, in which the doctrine of abnegation, of abstinence, and the denial and contempt of all worldly glory, 
is set forth most consistently. Next to this I would class 
the The Eulogmm of St. Hanno {Lohgesang auf den heiligen Anno) as the best of the religious kind; but this is of 
a far more secular character, differing from the first as the 
portrait of a Byzantine saint differs from an old German 
one. As in those Byzantine pictures, so we see in Barlaam 
and Josaphat the utmost simplicity ; there is no perspective 
side-work, and the long, lean, statue-like forms and the 
idealistic serious faces come out strongly drawn, as if from 
a mellow gold ground. On the other hand, in the song of 
praise of St. Hanno, the side-work or accessories are almost 
the subject, and, notwithstanding the grandeur of the plan, 
the details are treated in the minutest manner, so that we 
know not whether to admire in it the conception of a giant 
or the patience of a dwarf. But the evangel-poem of Ottfried, which is generally praised as the masterpiece of 
sacred poetry, is far less admirable than the two which I 
have mentioned. 

In profane poetry we find, as I have already signified, 
first the cycle of sagas of the Nibelungen and the Heldenbuch, or Book of Heroes. In them prevails all the pre-Christian manner of thought and of feeling; in them rude 
strength has not as yet been softened by chivalry. There 
the stern Kempe-warriors of the North stand like stone 
images, and the gentle gleam and the more refined breath 
of Christianity have not as yet penetrated their iron armor. 
But little by little alight dawns in the old Teutonic forest; 
the ancient idolatrous oak-trees are felled, and we see a 
brighter field of battle where Christ wars with the heathen. 
This appears in the saga-cycle of Charlemagne, in which 
what we really see is the Crusades reflecting themselves 
with their religious influences.