Vienna the Sunday after the full moon in the 
month of July of every year is, together with 
the following day, a real festival of the people, 
if ever a festival deserved the name. The people themselves attend and arrange it; and if 
representatives of the upper classes appear on this occasion, they may do so only in their capacity as members of 
the populace. There is no possibility of class discrimination; at least there was none some years ago. 

On this day the Brigittenau,* which with the Augarten, 
the Leopoldstadt and the Prater, forms one uninterrupted 
popular pleasure-ground, celebrates its kermis. The working people reckon their good times from one St. Bridget's 
kermis to the next. Anticipated with eager expectation, 
the Saturnalian festival at last arrives. Then there is great 
excitement in the good-natured, quiet town. A surging 
crowd fills the streets. There is the clatter of footsteps and 
the buzz of conversation, above which rises now and then 
some loud exclamation. All class distinctions have disappeared; civilian and soldier share in the commotion. At 
the gates of the city the crowd increases. Gained, lost, and 
regained, the exit is forced at last. But the bridge across 
the Danube presents new difficulties. Victorious here also, 
two streams finally roll along: the old river Danube and 
the swollen tide of people crossing each other, one below, 
the other above, the former following its old bed, the latter, 
freed from the narrow confines of the bridge, resembling a 
wide, turbulent lake, overflowing and inundating everything. A stranger might consider the symptoms alarming. 
But it is a riot of joy, a revelry of pleasure. 

Even in the space between the city and the bridge wicker-carriages
 are lined up for the real celebrants of this festival, the children of servitude and toil. 
 Although overloaded, these carriages race at a gallop through the mass of 
humanity, which in the nick of time opens a passage for 
them and immediately closes in again behind them. No 
one is alarmed, no one is injured, for in Vienna a silent 
agreement exists between vehicles and people, the former 
promising not to run anybody over, even when going at 
full speed; the latter resolving not to be run over, even 
though neglecting all precaution. 

Every second the distance between the carriages dimin- 
ishes. Occasionally more fashionable equipages mingle in 
the oft-interrupted procession. The carriages no longer 
dash along. Finally, about five or six hours before dark, 
the individual horses and carriages condense into a compact line,
 which, arresting itself and arrested by new vehicles from every side street, obviously belies the truth of the 
old proverb: "It is better to ride in a poor carriage than 
to go on foot." Stared at, pitied, mocked, the richly 
dressed ladies sit in their carriages, which are apparently 
standing still. Unaccustomed to constant stopping, the 
black Holstein steed rears, as if intending to jump straight 
up over the wicker-carriage blocking its way, a thing the 
screaming women and children in the plebeian vehicle evi- 
dently seem to fear. The cabby, so accustomed to rapid 
driving and now balked for the first time, angrily counts up 
the loss he suffers in being obliged to spend three hours 
traversing a distance which under ordinary conditions he 
could cover in five minutes. Quarreling and shouting are 
heard, insults pass back and forth between the drivers and 
now and then blows with the whip are exchanged. 