Finally, since in this world all standing still, however 
persistent, is after all merely an imperceptible advancing, 
a ray of hope appears even in this status quo. The first
trees of the Augarten and the Brigittenau come into view. 
The country! The country! All troubles are forgotten. 
Those who have come in vehicles alight and mingle with the 
pedestrians; strains of distant dance-music are wafted 
across the intervening space and are answered by the joyous shouts of the new arrivals. And thus it goes on and on, 
until at last the broad haven of pleasure opens up and grove 
and meadow, music and dancing, drinking and eating, 
magic lantern shows and tight-rope dancing, illumination 
and fireworks, combine to produce a pays de cocagne, an 
El Dorado, a veritable paradise, which fortunately or unfortunately — take it as you will — lasts only this day and 
the next, to vanish like the dream of a summer night, remaining only as a memory, or, possibly, as a hope. 

I never miss this festival if I can help it. To me, as a 
passionate lover of mankind, especially of the common people, and more especially so when, united into a mass, the 
individuals forget for a time their own private ends and 
consider themselves part of a whole, in which there is, after 
all, the spirit of divinity, nay, God Himself — to me every 
popular festival is a real soul-festival, a pilgrimage, an 
act of devotion. Even in my capacity as dramatic poet, I 
always find the spontaneous outburst of an overcrowded 
theatre ten times more interesting, even more instructive, 
than the sophisticated judgment of some literary matador, 
who is crippled in body and soul and swollen up, spider-like, 
with the blood of authors whom he has sucked dry. As 
from a huge open volume of Plutarch, which has escaped 
from the covers of the printed page, I read the biographies 
of these obscure beings in their merry or secretly troubled 
faces, in their elastic or weary step, in the attitude shown 
by members of the same family toward one another, in 
detached, half involuntary remarks. And, indeed, one can 
not understand famous men unless one has sympathized 
with the obscure ! From the quarrels of drunken pushcart-men to the discords of the sons of the gods there runs an 
invisible, yet unbroken, thread, just as the young servant-girl, who, half against her will, follows her insistent lover 
away from the crowd of dancers, may be an embryo Juliet, 
Dido, or Medea.
Two years ago, as usual, I had mingled as a pedestrian 
with the pleasure-seeking visitors of the kermis. The chief 
difficulties of the trip had been overcome, and 
I found myself at the end of the Augarten with the longed-for 
Brigittenau lying directly before me. Only one more difficulty remained to be overcome. 
A narrow causeway running between impenetrable hedges forms the 
only connection between the two pleasure resorts, the joint boundary of which 
is indicated by a wooden trellised gate in the centre. 
On ordinary days and for ordinary pedestrians this connecting 
passage affords more than ample space. But on kermis-day 
its width, even if quadrupled, would still be too narrow for 
the endless crowd which, in surging forward impetuously, 
is jostled by those bound in the opposite direction and 
manages to get along only by reason of the general good 
nature displayed by the merry-makers. 