I was drifting with the current and found myself in the 
centre of the causeway upon classical ground, although I 
was constantly obliged to stand still, turn aside, and wait. 
Thus I had abundant time for observing what was going on 
at the sides of the road. In order that the pleasure-seeking 
multitude might not lack a foretaste of the happiness in 
store for them, several musicians had taken up their positions on the left-hand slope of the raised causeway. 
Probably fearing the intense competition, these musicians intended to garner at the propylaea the first fruits of the 
liberality which had here not yet spent itself. There were 
a girl harpist with repulsive, staring eyes; an old invalid 
with a wooden leg, who, on a dreadful, evidently home-made 
instrument, half dulcimer, half barrel-organ, was endeavoring by means of analogy to arouse the pity of the public 
for his painful injury; a lame, deformed boy, forming with 
his violin one single, indistinguishable mass, was playing 
endless waltzes with all the hectic violence of his misshapen
breast ; and finally an old man, easily seventy years of age, 
in a threadbare but clean woolen overcoat, who wore a 
smiling, self-satisfied expression. This old man attracted 
my entire attention. He stood there bareheaded and bald-headed, his hat as a collection-box before him on the ground, 
after the manner of these people. He was belaboring an 
old, much-cracked violin, beating time not only by raising 
and lowering his foot, but also by a corresponding move- 
ment of his entire bent body. But all his efforts to bring 
uniformity into his performance were fruitless, for what 
he was playing seemed to be an incoherent succession of 
tones without time or melody. Yet he was completely absorbed in his work; his lips quivered, and his eyes were 
fixed upon the sheet of music before him, for he actually 
had notes! While all the other musicians, whose playing 
pleased the crowed infinitely better, were relying on their 
memories, the old man had placed before him in the midst 
of the surging crowd a small, easily portable music-stand, 
with dirty, tattered notes, which probably contained in perfect order what he was playing so incoherently. It was 
precisely the novelty of this equipment that had attracted 
my attention to him, just as it excited the merriment of the 
passing throng, who jeered him and left the hat of the old 
man empty, while the rest of the orchestra pocketed whole 
copper mines. In order to observe this odd character at 
my leisure, I had stepped, at some distance from him, upon 
the slope at the side of the causeway. For a while he continued playing. Finally he stopped, and, as if recovering 
himself after a long spell of absent-mindedness, he gazed at 
the firmament, which already began to show traces of approaching evening. Then he looked down into his hat, 
found it empty, put it on with undisturbed cheerfulness, 
and placed his bow between the strings. "Sunt certi denique fines" (there is a limit to everything), he said, took 
his music-stand, and, as though homeward bound, fought 
his way with difficulty through the crowd streaming in the 
opposite direction toward the festival.
The whole personality of the old man was specially calculated to whet my anthropological appetite to the utmost 
— his poorly clad, yet noble figure, his unfailing cheerfulness, so much artistic zeal combined with such awkwardness, the fact that he returned home just at the time when 
for others of his ilk the real harvest was only beginning, 
and, finally, the few Latin words, spoken, however, with the 
most correct accent and with absolute fluency. The man 
had evidently received a good education and had acquired 
some knowledge, and here he was — a street-musician! I 
was burning with curiosity to learn his history. 