But a compact wall of humanity already separated us. 
Small as he was, and getting in everybody's way with the 
music-stand in his hand, he was shoved from one to another 
and had passed through the exit-gate while I was still 
struggling in the centre of the causeway against the opposing crowd. Thus I lost track of him; and when at last I 
had reached the quiet, open space, there was no musician to 
be seen far or near. 

This fruitless adventure had spoiled all my enjoyment of 
the popular festival. I wandered through the Augarten in 
all directions, and finally decided to go home. As I neared 
the little gate that leads out of the Augarten into Tabor 
Street, I suddenly heard the familiar sound of the old 
violin. I accelerated my steps, and, behold ! there stood the 
object of my curiosity, playing with all his might, surrounded by several boys who impatiently demanded a waltz 
from him. "Play a waltz," they cried; "a waltz, don't you 
hear?" The old man kept on fiddling, apparently paying 
no attention to them, until his small audience, reviling and 
mocking him, left him and gathered around an organ- 
grinder who had taken up his position near by. 

"They don't want to dance," said the old man sadly, and 
gathered up his musical outfit. I had stepped up quite close 
to him. "The children do not know any dance but the 
waltz," I said.
"I was playing a waltz," he replied, indicating with his
bow the notes of the piece he had just been playing. "You 
have to play things like that for the crowd. But the children have no ear for music," he said, shaking his head 
mournfully. 

"At least permit me to atone for their ingratitude," I 
said, taking a silver coin out of my pocket and offering it 
to him. 

"Please, don't," cried the old man, at the same time 
warding me off anxiously with both hands — "into the hat, 
into the hat." I dropped the coin into his hat, which was 
lying in front of him. The old man immediately took it 
out and put it into his pocket, quite satisfied. "That's what 
I call going home for once with a rich harvest," he said 
chuckling. 

"You just remind me of a circumstance, "I said," which 
excited my curiosity before. It seems your earnings today 
have not been particularly satisfactory, and yet you retire 
at the very moment when the real harvest is beginning. 
The festival, as you no doubt know, lasts the whole night, 
and you might easily earn more in this one night than in 
an entire week ordinarily. How am I to account for this?" 