"How are you to account for this?" replied the old man. 
"Pardon me, I do not know who you are, but you must be 
a generous man and a lover of music." With these words 
he took the silver coin out of his pocket once more and 
pressed it between his hands, which he raised to his heart. 
"I shall therefore tell you the reasons, although I have 
often been ridiculed for them. In the first place, I have 
never been a night-reveler, and I do not consider it right 
to incite others to such a disgusting procedure by means of 
playing and singing. Secondly, a man ought to establish 
for himself a certain order in all things, otherwise he'll 
run wild and there's no stopping him. Thirdly, and finally, 
sir, I play for the noisy throng all day long and scarcely 
earn a bare living. But the evening belongs to me and to 
my poor art. In the evening I stay at home, and" — at 
these words he lowered his voice, a blush overspread his
countenance and his eyes sought the ground — " then I play 
to myself as fancy dictates, without notes. I believe the 
text-books on music call it improvising." 

We had both grown silent, he from confusion, because 
he had betrayed the innermost secret of his heart, I from 
astonishment at hearing a man speak of the highest spheres 
of art who was not capable of rendering even the simplest 
waltz in intelligible fashion. Meanwhile he was preparing 
to depart. "Where do you live?" I inquired. "I should 
like to attend your solitary practising some day." 

"Oh," he replied, almost imploringly, "you must know 
that prayers should be said in private ! " 

"Then I'll visit you in the daytime," I said. 

"In the daytime," he replied, "I earn my living among 
the people." 

"Well, then, some morning early." 

"It almost looks," the old man said smiling, "as though 
you, my dear sir, were the recipient, and I, if I may be 
permitted to say so, the benefactor ; you are so kind, and I 
reject your advances so ungraciously. Your distinguished 
visit will always confer honor on my dwelling. Only I 
should like to ask you to be so very kind as to notify me 
beforehand of the day of your coming, in order that you 
may not be unduly delayed nor I be compelled to interrupt 
unceremoniously some business in which I may be engaged 
at the time. For my mornings are also devoted to a definite 
purpose. At any rate, I consider it my duty to my patrons 
and benefactors to offer something not entirely unworthy 
in return for their gifts. I have no desire to be a beggar, 
sir ; I am very well aware of the fact that the other street 
musicians are satisfied to reel off a few street ditties, German waltzes, even melodies of indecent songs, all of which 
they have memorized. These they repeat incessantly, so 
that the public pays them either in order to get rid of them, 
or because their playing revives the memory of former joys 
of dancing or of other disorderly amusements. 