Do not come any more to me. You are a false fellow, 
and the hangman take all such! 

You are an honorable fellow, and I see you were right. 
So come this afternoon to me. You will also find Schuppanzigh, and both of us will blow you up, thump you, and 
shake you ; so you will have a fine time of it. 

My Dear, My Good Amenda, My Heartily Beloved Friend : 
With deep emotion, with mixed pain and pleasure, did I 
receive and read your last letter. To what can I compare 
your fidelity, your attachment to me. Oh ! how pleasant it 
is that you have always remained so kind to me ; yes, I also 
know that you, of all men, are the most trustworthy. You 
are no Viennese friend; no, you are one of those such as 
ray native country produces. How often do I wish you were
with me, for your Beethoven is most unhappy and at strife 
with nature and the Creator. The latter I have often 
cursed for exposing His creatures to the smallest chance, 
so that frequently the richest buds are thereby crushed and 
destroyed. Only think that the noblest part of me, my sense 
of hearing, has become very weak. Already when you were 
with me I noted traces of it, and I said nothing. Now it 
has become worse, and it remains to be seen whether it can 
ever be healed. What a sad life I am now compelled to lead ! I can say that among all Lichnowski has best 
stood the test. Since last year he has settled on me 600 
florins, which, together with the good sale of my works, 
enables me to live without anxiety. Everything I write, I 
can sell immediately five times over, and also be well paid. 
Oh ! how happy should I now be if I had my perfect hearing, for I should then hasten to you. As it is, I 
must in all things be behindhand; my best years will slip 
away without bringing forth what, with my talent and my 
strength, I ought to have accomplished. I must now have 
recourse to sad resignation. I have, it is true, resolved not 
to worry about all this, but how is it possible? Yes, 
Amenda, if, six months hence, my malady is beyond cure, 
then I lay claim to your help. You must leave everything 
and come to me. I will travel (my malady interferes least 
with my playing and composition, most only in conversation), and you must be my companion. I am convinced good 
fortune will not fail me. With whom need I be afraid of 
measuring my strength? Since you went away I have written music of all kinds except operas and sacred works. 