Engelhardt rolled his head from side to side on the pillow. He was exhausted by a sleepless night and by the 
effects of the hypnotics that the Doctor had given him. 

" Very ill ! " answered he in a lifeless tone. 

"Very ill?" Michael Petroff raised his eyebrows 
anxiously. He turned to the little lawyer, who still stood 
at the door. "Our poor friend does not feel well!" 
said he. 

"Are you in pain? " Michael Petroff bent once more 
over the sick man and held his ear near Engelhardt 's mouth. 

" Yes," answered the sick man in a dull and lifeless 
tone, and murmured something in Petroff 's ear. It sounded 
as if he were praying. 

Michael Petroff straightened up again and glanced at 
the little lawyer. " He says that he has come to the end 
of his strength, our poor friend. He needs a new soul — 
like that time in the winter, when the attendant died, don't 
you remember? " And he shouted into the ear of the 
sufferer, unnecessarily loud : "I will speak with the 
Doctor, Friend Engelhardt. This is the Doctor's business. 
In one way or another he will get you a soul ! " 

But the little lawyer suddenly wrapped himself closer 
in his shawl. He was as cold as ice. Ordinarily very few 
impressions remained in his memory, but he still remembered clearly the death of the attendant Schwindt — and 
how Michael Petroff had come to his room and whispered 
mysteriously in his ear: " The attendant is dead. Engelhardt has taken his soul, don't you see! " So now he was 
horrified at the thought that Engelhardt might perhaps 
demand his soul, and there was nothing that he feared 
moro than death. 

Death dwelt in his confused sick brain as a figure that 
was invisible all but the hands. Suddenly, Oh so suddenly, 
it would si and near him, close by his side. And a horrible 
chill would stream forth from the dread form, and all the 
flowers, while with frost, would die, and the millions of 
swifl little birds would fall frozen through the air, and he 
himself' would be changed into a little heap of snow.
The lawyer drew in his head, so that his thin gray beard 
pushed out above his scarf, and gazed timidly at Michael 
Petroff with his little mouse-like eyes and shivered. 

Michael Petroff looked at him in astonishment. " What 
is the matter, my dear fellow?" he drawled, smilingly. 
"Are you afraid? Why should you be, I wonder? I shall 
go at once to Dr. Marz and explain to him what Engelhardt 
requires. From what I know T of him, he will not delay, 
and so everything will be attended to. I would gladly 
place my own soul at your disposal, Friend Engelhardt, 
but I still need it myself — I have a mission to fulfil, you 
know — I am Napoleon, and I fight a battle every day, 
I am — " But here he paused suddenly and listened. 